 Hi, this is Maria from dresspattingmaking.com. This started as a 3 part series on drafting
 the pants block, but now it's turned into 5 parts. This is part 4, drafting the block
 for Jane. This system for drafting pants that I've devised is a work in progress and I have
 thought of ways that I can improve it since I've started making these videos. But I've
 continued in this video and I will continue in Anne's video to do it the same way that
 I've started in the others. But I do plan on improving it, I'll be changing it a bit
 and hopefully making some things a little bit simpler. I'll be publishing an ePub booklet,
 not a paper version that I'll be selling and I plan on publishing that in the next couple
 of months. Before I take just a couple of minutes to compare Jane's figure to the standard
 figure, I just want to remind you why I'm doing these comparisons. I'm going into this detail
 for people like me who have used other block making instructions and have struggled getting
 a good fit with those instructions and who want to understand why. After getting bad
 results a number of times, in the end I wanted not only a block that fitted but I wanted
 to understand why these block making instructions weren't working for me and I'm wanting to
 pass on what I learned. Jane has less of a difference between her waist and her hips
 than the standard figure, her thighs are proportionally smaller, slightly but smaller, she has a drop
 bottom which means she needs a longer crotch length and her last just circumference is
 at her crotch depth, not two inches above her crotch. So these are the things that would
 have been a problem using the other system but we're going to cover them all, account
 for them all so it won't be a problem for Jane in my system. In video 2 I drafted up
 to this point for the standard figure but those instructions are valid for all figures.
 I will point out though that as Jane's largest circumference is around her crotch, the width
 of the foundation from point C to point I is based on her circumference around her crotch
 level rather than her low hip. So I'm starting from here and now I'm going to zoom in at
 200% so we can focus on the foundation and do the waist shaping. So I'm zooming in to
 200% of the previous image so I can focus on the foundation and you can see it better.
 Currently the crotch depth is the body measurement crotch depth and we need some ease therefore
 I'm going to drop the crotch point. From point D I will measure down 5/8 of an inch at right
 angles to the C to D line and mark point D1. I'll continue the L to I line down below
 the C to D line for an inch or so that's shown with the pink arrow and then draw a line at
 right angles to touch the new crotch point D1 and that's shown by a blue arrow. These
 are just guidelines that may help us draw the crotch curve in later.
 Now I need to do a calculation to do the waist shaping. I'll take Anne's waist measurement
 which is 29.5 inches and add 1 inch ease. The sum is 30.5 inches and I'll divide that
 by 4. So the waist for both the front and the back will be 7.5/8 of an inch. I'm going
 to try to apply the standard waist shaping for Jane and see what we get. On the waistline
 from point L I will move in half an inch and mark point P. Just to explain or remind you
 if you've watched the previous videos what I mean by standard waist shaping. I'm referring
 to giving step-by-step instructions that work well for a figure that has 10 inches difference
 between the waist and the hips. So if you have 10 inches difference between your waist
 and hips those instructions will probably work well for you. The problem is that it might
 not work so well if you have more than 10 inches difference or a lot less. Whether or not it
 ends up working well also depends on whether your high hip is in proportion to your waist
 and low hip. So basically although I've been able to write instructions that get a better
 result for most figures up to a certain point as in including the thigh measurement and
 drawing how to get the crotch length as far as waist shaping goes I can't see a way of
 writing one set of step-by-step instructions that will get a good result for everyone.
 So I'm suggesting that everyone tries the standard waist shaping to begin with and then
 I work through some problem solving if that doesn't work. So I've moved in half an inch
 from point L to point P. I'll draw a line from point P on the waist to point J on the
 low hip line. At the point where it crosses the high hip line I'll mark point K2. Now
 I'll take the waist measurement of 7 and 5/8 of an inch and add half an inch for an
 art. Using that total I'll measure from point P towards point O on the waistline and mark
 point Q. So moving on to the high hip. I'll take the high hip measurement and add one
 inch ease for a total of 36 inches. Dividing that by 4 gives me 9 inches. On the high hip
 line I will measure from point K2 towards point N and mark point R. Now I set at the
 beginning that Jane's largest circumference is at her crotch depth and from C to I is
 that width and from J to M is that same width. Therefore that means on her low hip level
 I need to plot another measurement. I'll take her low hip measurement, add one inch
 ease and then divide that total by 4. On her low hip line I will measure 9 and 3/8 of an
 inch from point J and mark point M2. Now for Jane this difference isn't enormous. It's
 only 3/8 of an inch total around her body but if you're trying to get a consistent one
 inch ease in the foundation then she may end up with a bit of puffiness there or just extra
 ease that just doesn't look right. So and this is 3/8 of an inch for Jane but for someone
 else it may be a lot more. So I'll try to take this extra ease out if I can. Now when
 I try and join up those points I either lose some at the crotch level or I can't shave
 off that bit at the low hip. Now while you don't have to draw the curve in one pass meaning
 that you can draw two curves and blend them in this case that just won't work. You can
 maybe see by the straight lines that this is not going to lend itself to blending into
 a curve that makes sense. Now I'll just go back to the option of shaving some off at
 the crotch level. When I drafted the front for the standard figure I shaved some off
 at the crotch level but the standard figure is smaller there. The widest part of the standard
 figure is the low hip. When I drafted mine I did not shave any off at the crotch level
 because that's where I'm the widest and that is where Jane is the widest too so I don't
 want to shave any off at her crotch level. Instead of plotting the point starting from
 the center front line going towards the side seam I'm going to start at the side seam and
 move inwards towards the center front. I'll do this with the low hip and the high hip
 not for the waist. Now in so doing I have renamed the end points so now on the low hip
 it's from M to M2 towards point J and from N to N2 towards point K. And then I'll redraw
 the center front line from P to M2. I then can draw a side seam from point Q at the waist
 through point N at the high hip, M at the low hip and C at the crotch depth without sacrificing
 any of the width at the crotch depth and without having any extra ease in the low hip.
 Now given when I drafted my block I came in at the center front more than the standard
 figure for example the distance L to P was more than half an inch because I'm curvy you
 may think that for Jane the answer would be to make the L to P distance shorter and try
 to do the waist shaping that way rather than the way that I just did it. Now you could
 try that and for example you could try many things but I just want to point out that what
 I have done is in effect that same thing. I have reduced the distance from L to P, reduced
 that waist that dart in the center front. Because I've moved the low hip point over
 to the left so M2 is to the left of J. If I draw a line straight up at right angles to
 the low hip line from M2 to the waist that's the pink dashed line in the image. You'll
 see that the point where that crosses the waist is to the left of point L. So the distance
 between point L2 and P is shorter so that front dart is actually smaller than for the
 standard figure. So now to finish off this front I made an allowance for half an inch
 dart which I'll center on point A so the dart will be half inch wide and three inches
 long. Now all that needs to be done to finish the front is to draw the crotch curve and
 then measure the crotch length to check if it needs adjusting. Now I had actually previously
 drawn those guidelines which are shown in purple on this image but because we moved point M2
 over or we moved the low hip point over from J to M2 we'll need to redraw that guideline.
 So we'll draw a line down from point M2 at right angles to the low hip line and that's
 shown with the pink arrow. Then I'll draw a line at right angles to that line to touch
 the crotch point D1 which is shown with a blue arrow. So I've drawn a line which is
 actually a black arrow at 45 degrees to where the two guidelines intercept. Now I want to
 talk about the length of that arrow which helps you draw in the curve. Now most block
 making instructions give you very clear almost exact length for that line to help you draw
 the curve. Now that standard figure is the one that I drafted using my system and the
 length of that arrow to draw the curve is very close to what most block making instructions
 suggests. Now I've got there some examples. Joseph Armstrong says one and a quarter inches.
 Aldridge gives more exact measurements based on the hip size and NOLS is similar to Aldridge.
 The issue is that the system of determining that arrow length to be that is based on that
 proportional relationship between the hip and the extension which equals the thigh. So
 if Jane had that proportional relationship between her hip and thigh which is shown by
 the pink lines and that difference there is a difference between her crotch length and
 the standard figure. So she had those proportions then that black arrow or that arrow that helps
 draw the curve would be one and a quarter inches which is what the block making instructions
 say. But my point is that since there is not that proportional relationship between the
 extension and the thigh it's actually based on your actual thigh measurement. It's hard
 for me to give you an exact length for that arrow. Basically if your thigh is 60% of the
 measurement you're using as your hip then the length of that arrow will be about one
 and a quarter inches. If your thigh is smaller it'll be shorter. If your thigh is larger it'll
 be longer. So my suggestion is get a French curve and draw a curve that looks nice. Test
 it out in the 12 and make any changes from there. So now I'll measure the crotch length
 from point D1 up to the waist point P. So the crotch length is too long. I'll stop before
 point P and mark my new point as P2. I'll redraw the waist curve from point Q to point P and
 I'll need to check that the dark legs are the same length. Now it's better to concentrate
 on getting the foundation correct first but if you really want to make sure that your
 leg has a good shape it might be an idea to take an additional measurement. Say the lower
 thigh about 8 inches above the knee and use that additional measurement plot the points
 to help you draw the curve. Now I suggest if you do that if you take that additional measurement
 you add very little ease so you just divide it by 2 and add say 3/8 of an inch because
 again a lot of the ease will be a lot more ease in the back leg. So this is Jane's front
 finished and I'll move on to drafting her back. I won't be doing Jane's block right
 from the very beginning. I'll start with all the back points plotted. That is covered
 in video 2 from 18 minutes and 27 seconds through to 20 minutes and 28 seconds. And
 like I did for the front I use Jane's largest circumference to plot the points D to I not
 her low hit measurement. Now these next few steps were actually covered for the standard
 figure in video 2 from 20 minutes 23 seconds to 23 minutes and 23 seconds. I'll cover them
 again quickly for Jane because there's a couple of extra points I want to make for her. So
 I'll start by drawing straight lines from the knee to the ankle from knee point E to
 ankle point G and from knee point F to ankle point H. I'll draw a short guideline about
 2 inches long down from point C and at right angles to the C to D line. I'll take Jane's
 block and turn it upside down. I'll match the in seam knee point of the front block with
 the knee line of the pants block at point E. I'll rotate the front block until the crotch
 point touches the guideline I drew in the last step. I'll name that point C2. That's
 now the back crotch point. I'll set aside the pants front for the minute and measure
 in a quarter of an inch from point D and mark point D2. So I'll bring the front block back
 again and flip it over to match the out seam knee point of the front with the knee point
 F of the back. I'll rotate the block so it passes through point D2 and touches the low
 hip at point M. I'll trace that front block from point F to point M. I'll rotate the front
 block so that the crotch point, low hip, high hip and waist lines match up and the front
 is exactly on top of the back at those key points. I'll trace the front side seam line
 from the low hip point M to the waist and label at the point at the waist point P.
 Now this shaping of the side seam, we did this for the standard figure and we actually
 did it for my figure two, but someone might question this because we've moved in quarter
 of an inch from D to D2. We've shaved off some of the crotch circumference for Jane and since
 we went to the trouble of making it wider here, is it going to be too small for her?
 Well, two things on that. Well, firstly, if I had plotted D to I using her low hip measurement
 as shown by that pink dashed line and I had come in here from D to D2, then she would
 be smaller there than she is currently. But more to the point, on the back here, D to
 I does not correlate to the place where I measure the circumference around Jane's crotch level.
 At the front it is that here at the back it isn't. Let me explain.
 That pink line on the green block shows where that crotch circumference would be. It is
 not from D to I, it is angled up from D to I. The twirl that is shown is my twirl, but
 the concept is the same. I'm just showing it to you here in 3D because sometimes in 2D
 it's harder to see, harder to... So here it is in 2D. What should be obvious is the length
 of the pink arrow is longer than the length of the blue arrow. So Jane will have a bit
 more length than is indicated by D to I or by the blue arrow. Now another thing is that
 Jane does need an extension to her back crotch length because she has a drop bottom. Her
 crotch length is longer than the standard figure, so it might be clearer once I've done that.
 So here's another example, another pictorial representation. The blue line, which is the
 crotch depth at the back goes underneath the bottom. When you're measuring around the body
 at the crotch level, you do it at the front crotch level parallel to the floor. So the
 blue line going underneath the bottom is not where you're measuring, where the tape measure
 goes around when you're measuring that circumference. Part of the problem is this 3D representation
 doesn't give an indication of how the fabric drops down underneath the bottom. Now I have
 given some examples of that in the previous video, so if you haven't watched that, that
 might help if you don't understand this. So this is where we're up to before I digress
 to explain why it's okay to shave a little bit off from D to T2, so we're up to doing
 the waist. So of course I'll use the same waist measurement as I did for the pants front.
 I'll take the waist measurement at 1 each ease and divided by 4. So I'll measure across
 from point P for that waist measurement plus 3/4" for a dart and mark point Q. I'll measure
 up from point Q at right angles to the waistline for 3/4" and mark point R. Now I'll draw
 the waistline from point P to point R. Moving down to the crotch area, I'll continue the
 L to I line down below the crotch line for a few inches. I'll then draw a horizontal
 line at right angles to the one just drawn from point C2 to cross that line. I'll mark
 the intersection of those two lines with an X. I'll mark point S halfway between point
 L on the waistline and point I on the crotchline. Now I'll draw in the back crotchline. I'll
 start by drawing a straight line from point R at the waist through point S to touch the
 low hip guideline. Then I'll draw a curve from the crotch point C to blend to that point
 using a French curve. The length of that arrow drawn at 45 degrees to the two guidelines
 is 1" for Jane. It was 1 1/2" for the standard figure and for me it was 1 1/8" or 1 1/4".
 As a general guide, the bigger your thigh is in proportion to your hip, the longer that
 the length of that arrow will likely be and the smaller your thigh is in proportion to
 your hip, the shorter it will be. But the standard figure is about 1 1/2". So around
 1 1 1/2", a bit more or a bit less is a good starting point and you'll check that on your
 twirl. So in the center of the back waistline, I'll
 draw a dart that's 3/4" wide and 4 1/2" long. The dart should be at right angles to
 the waistline. So I've checked the crotch length and it's
 too short. It's 13 and 13/16". Jane needs 15 and 3/4". So I'm going to have to cut
 and spread to get that extra length like I did on my block. I'll draw a straight line
 from point D2 through the low hip line and cut and spread keeping a hinge. So that means
 I'll cut up to point D2 on the left and then cut in from the low hip and so yes keep a
 little hinge at point D2. So I've put some yellow paper underneath
 and I've opened it up and measured it and I might have to close it and open it up a bit
 more to get the right length. When I've determined that I've got the right length, I'd stick
 it down with sticky tape and then smooth that curve. I will also need to smooth out the
 side seam curve. Now in cutting and spreading, the grain
 line has moved at the top so the correct grain line is the one that comes up straight through
 the middle of the leg. So extend that grain line shown by the black dashed line and grain
 line is written there. The pink dashed line is the previous grain line that's kind of
 skewed off when we cut and spread so that can be rubbed out or gotten rid of. You want
 the grain line that goes straight up the leg. Now here's Jane's final block, front
 and back. I actually haven't notched it, make sure you notch your block. I suggest you draw
 all of your lines on your twile. If you have added to your crotch length, I suggest you
 keep a note as I have done with that yellow wedge and draw it on your twile as well. So
 that's the end of this video. Next time, drafting the block for Anne, and after that,
 why upper bust? But for the moment, ciao!
 ♪ It's all passed away ♪
