 Hi, this is Maria from dresspattingmaking.com. This video is a revision of the bodice block
 front instructions I uploaded in April 2021. There was a mistake in that video that affects
 the side seam length and a related mistake in the measurement video. On YouTube it isn't
 possible to make changes to a video so I have to upload another one. This video uses metric
 measurements and the background grid is in centimeters. I have already uploaded the
 imperial version. Bodice instructions on 13th of March but I wasn't thinking very
 clearly at the time I said that because the bodice instructions is not one video, it's
 the four videos listed, front and back in both imperial and metric versions. I'm uploading
 the bodice front ones today and tomorrow and the two bodice back will be uploaded in the
 next few days so they're about a week late. Now if you find my content useful please consider
 buying me a cup of coffee on Ko-fi. The link can be found in my channel header.
 I recommend you draft the bodice front before you draft the bodice back but even before
 you start the front I suggest that you watch the bodice block essential videos first and
 watch them in order. That is the order listed on this slide and also the order that they
 can be found in the bodice block essentials playlist on my channel. Be aware that in the
 measurements video part six the instructions on how to take two of the measurements are
 incorrect so you will need to redo those two after watching the beginning of this video
 where I show the corrected instructions. Before starting to draft the block I need to cover
 the two measurements that need to be taken differently to how they are explained in the
 measurements video. Now the instructions I uploaded in April 21 had significant changes
 to my original system and one of those changes was drafting a moo large first which means
 using the body measurements when drafting and then at the end turning it into a block
 by adding ease. So the silly mistake I made was using the body measurements for everything
 except the upper bus placement and therefore as the flow and effect in the instructions
 that I give the side seam length ends up being incorrect. The twirl on DD on the left is
 the photo from the previous instructions and the photo that is used in the measurements
 video. The upper bus line in pink is two and a half centimeters or one inch below the
 underarm which should be the placement of the sleeved block not the moo large. The right
 hand side image shows the correct placement of the body upper bus line. In the measurements
 video I also instructed for the side seam length to be taken from a depth of two and a
 half centimeters or one inch below the underarm point to the waist. Again that is the side
 seam length for the sleeved block not the moo large. The body measurements for the side
 seam length should be right up against the underarm down to the waist as shown in the
 right hand side image. Those instructions started off with an incorrectly lowered armhole,
 an armhole for a sleeved block and then the armhole was lowered further to create a sleeveless
 and sleeved block. This means if you continue to follow the instructions as given you would
 have ended up with an armhole that was too low and a side seam length that was too short.
 So the blocks I ended up with for DD at the end of the drafting process and in this case
 I'm showing the sleeveless block ended up incorrect. So I've remade DD's 12 with the
 upper bus level correct for the moo large. So some notes for taking these measurements.
 The upper bus is taken at the underarm level with a tape measure around your torso up against
 your underarm of course you need to break that down to the upper bus front and the upper
 bus back. The side seam is from the underarm to the waist but make sure you don't lift
 your shoulders when you take the side seam measurement. For the side seam you could stick
 the end of the tape measure onto a ruler making sure you butt the end of the tape measure
 exactly up against the ruler's edge and put the ruler under your arm again be sure your
 shoulder is down and put that tape measure under the waist elastic to make sure you get
 the correct measurement. You need to have someone to read that measurement though or
 you may risk it being incorrect if you have to move to try to read it.
 To the left is the front block I'll be drafting for DD it is a sleeveless block. I will start
 by drafting the one dart block first the moo large then I'll add the ease of the sleeveless
 block then add ease for the block to be used with sleeves.
 After most of the block is drafted I'll be manipulating some of the waist dart into
 the side seam so that we end up with a 2 dart block as shown in the middle. So I will and
 you will if you're drafting your block end up with the option of using the moo large the
 sleeveless block or the standard block which is the one you use when you add sleeves. Together
 with the bodice back it will make a bodice set but of course if you do want to use the
 standard block the one that is drafted specifically to use with sleeves you will also need to
 draft the sleeve block. Now I just want to be very clear about this. Most block making
 instruction draft a bodice block that is to be used with sleeves. Now the difficulty with
 that is that people try it on before putting the sleeves on and that's a good idea because
 you actually do want to fit the bodice before adding the sleeve but then they think there's
 too much ease in that bodice because the amount of ease there is too much for a sleeveless
 block and then they might over fit then when they put the sleeve on it will be too fitting.
 So my recommendation is that you trace off and make the sleeveless block for fit but you
 do have the option if you prefer of tracing off the moo large or tracing off the standard
 block. Of course if you make any changes to the one that you've traced off you will have
 to go back and make the relevant changes to the others. This is a comparison showing you
 my sleeveless block in comparison with DD's. This is to show you how different blocks can
 look. DD's block is on the left, mine is in the middle and on the right one is on top
 of the other to better compare them. Now the reason DD's side seem dark looks so different
 to mine or mine looks different to hers is that she has an A cup or even less than an
 A cup and that's pattern making a cup I'm talking about not a bra bust cup and I have
 somewhere between a C cup and a D cup. This means I have a larger difference between my
 upper bust and my bust than DD does. DD's upper bust and bust are almost the same measurement.
 Now as should be expected the shape of the block shows you the shape of the person. Having
 said that the front is only telling half the story you need to look at the back together
 with the front to see the whole story. Looking at this you might assume that DD and I have
 the same upper bust measurement but that's not the case as my back arc, my upper bust
 back arc is smaller than DD's. Here is another comparison DD's twirl and my twirl and our
 blocks with one on top of the other. It's good to get an understanding of how the block
 translates to 3D when put on the body. You can use either paper or cardboard to draft
 the block. You will be drafting them a large, sleeveless and the standard block altogether.
 It's best therefore to keep the original and trace off what you want to use.
 After you've tested your block and you're sure it's finalized, then put the paper version
 on top of cardboard, tape it down all along the edges and cut it out. The paper and cardboard
 will separate easily if you cut exactly along the edge. The cardboard version would be your
 master copy. This is easier to use because it has a firmer edge and it's easier to trace
 around than paper so you would trace it out each time you want to use it to draft a pattern.
 We will be drafting the half block shown to the left. This means if any measurements
 were taken across the forefront, they have to be divided by 2. Now if you have an asymmetric
 figure, you may eventually want to figure out how each side is different and work with
 the forefront instead of the half front. On my website, I have a downloadable PDF with
 a list of measurements for the bodice block. A link can be found below in the YouTube video
 description section. If you happen to be watching this video on my website, then it's on the
 website page.
 Ok so let's start drafting. Firstly on your paper, draw a horizontal line across the bottom
 of your paper to indicate the waste. No measurement as yet, this is a reference line and we'll
 start drafting from this point upwards. Actually I want to point out that when drafting the
 bodice block, the center front and the center back are facing in different directions. So
 here the center back is on the left of the back block whereas the center front is on the
 right of the front block. That's because they are made for the same side of the body. So
 this is DD's right side back and right side front. That means that when you true the pieces,
 they will be up the correct way, you won't have to flip one over.
 So for DD, I'll be starting with the center front on the right side and drafting to the
 left. So the first measurement, number 10 on the measurement chart is the full length
 front. Using your full length front measurement, draw a vertical line from A on the waistline
 up to point B. Make sure the vertical line is at right angles to the horizontal waist
 guideline, mark points A and B. The measurement, as shown on DD, is taken from the high neck
 point to the waist over the bust in a straight line.
 The upper bust arc front is measurement number two on the measurement chart. The upper bust
 arc front measurement is from side seam to side seam and you need to divide the measurement
 in two for the half block. Using that measurement, measure across from B in a straight line making
 sure that it's at right angles to the A to B line and mark points C. Then finish the
 rectangle drawing a line from C down to the waist and mark point D. Make sure all corners
 are right angles. Now to be clear, this is just the body measurement, no ease. We will
 add the ease after we've drafted the block to the body measurements right at the end.
 Using your center front measurement, that's measurement number 11 on the chart. Measure
 up from point A on the A to B line and mark point E. Then draw a line from point E at
 right angles to the A to E line for about 10 centimetres and mark the end of that line
 point E2. This is just a guideline, the E to E2, to help us draw the neck curve in later.
 As it's a guideline, it does not need to be an exact length.
 The across shoulder front is the next measurement, it's number 12 on the chart. I need to make
 a point here. For the rest of this video, you know I'm drafting the bodice front, so
 if I say across shoulder rather than across shoulder front, I assume that you know it's
 the front I'm talking about because I'm not drafting the back. I will try to remember
 to include the front, but please be aware. Making sure on the measurement chart, you're
 working in the front section. Your across shoulder front is generally measured from the
 centre front neck to the shoulder point. However, if you have a rounded up a back with a forward
 jutting neck or very sloped shoulders and you take it this way, you'll end up with an
 incorrect across shoulder front measurement and you'll need to take the measurement a
 bit further down. Now using your across shoulder front measurement, measure across from point
 B towards point C and mark point F. Then draw another guideline, again because it's a guideline,
 it does not need to be an exact length. About 8 to 10 centimetres down from point F at
 right angles to the B to F line and mark point F2. The shoulder slope front is measurement
 number 13 on the measurement chart. Using your shoulder slope front measurement, measure
 up diagonally from point A to touch the F to F2 guideline where it touches the guideline
 mark point G. Now some instructions say to add an 8th of an inch or so to your shoulder
 slope measurement for some ease. I just find that when you take those measurements a number
 of times, you can be out an 8th of an inch each time you take it. My opinion is just
 take the body measurement and fine tune it in the 12. Now taking your bus depth measurement,
 that's measurement number 14 on the chart, measure down along the shoulder slope line
 from point G and mark point H. Then draw a line from point H to the centre front line
 and make that right angles to the centre front line. That is your bus level. Mark point
 H2 at the centre front. If you have taken the bus depth measurement a number of ways,
 that is number 15 and number 16 on the measurement chart, you can use those measurements to double
 check. So first measure from point E to point H2, this should be the same as measurement
 number 15 on the chart. Then measure from the B to C line and at right angles to it
 down to point H. This should match measurement number 16 on the chart. If those measurements
 don't match up, then you've taken some measurements incorrectly and you might want to check it
 before continuing. The bus span is measurement number 18 on the measurement chart. It's usually
 taken from bus point to bus point and divided by 2. So measure from H2 on the H2 to H line
 and mark point H3. Now for some people, H3 will end up being to the left of point H.
 For DD, H3 has ended up almost exactly on top of point H. But wherever H3 has ended
 up, whether it's on top of H or to the left of H, rename H3 as the bus point and erase
 H. So you should end up with point H2 at the centre front and the bus point. So before
 we look at the shoulder length, let's look at that bus point. So what I have is just
 H2 at the centre front line and then I've got bus point. Now for some people, that bus
 point will be to the left of the shoulder slope line and it could be quite a bit to
 the left of that shoulder slope line. But the H and H3 have been erased. So moving on
 to the shoulder length, which is measurement number eight on the chart. Using the shoulder
 length measurement, measure from point G to touch the C to B line and mark point I. I
 am using a lower case I as the upper case looks like a one. Okay from I and at right
 angles to the G to I shoulder length, draw a guideline down past the E to E2 line and
 mark the end of that guideline I too. It just has to be somewhere past the E to E2 line.
 The armhole depth is measurement number 19 on the measurement chart. Using the armhole
 depth measurement, measure down from point C on the C to D line and mark point J. From
 point J draw a straight line to the centre front making sure it is at right angles to
 the centre front line. This is the upper bus line. Now you don't usually mark the upper
 bus line on the block but I want you to mark it to make sure you remember to draw it on
 your twile. It is good to see that line on your twile. So you are clear where the upper
 bus is not just at your armhole depth but at the front and at the back. And I have included
 a photo of my twile so you can see that for some people it wouldn't be quite so obvious
 where their upper bus is without this drawn on the twile to show you.
 Measurements number 20 and 21 are checking measurements to confirm your front armhole
 depth. Measure from point E to the upper bus line and see if it matches measurement number
 20. Measure from point G to the upper bus line and see if it matches measurement number
 21. If they don't match firstly check your measurements. If you can't get them to match
 choose one and keep drafting. You'll draw the lines on the twile and check them again
 at that stage. This isn't a side. If you find, notice, come across a mistake in my videos
 and I mean a mistake that matters regarding drafting the block. Not a spelling mistake.
 Please first check the video description in the YouTube underneath this video to see if
 I have noted that mistake and if I have put a link to the correct information. If there
 is nothing in the YouTube description box then it hasn't been brought to my attention
 and I haven't noticed it and in that case please let me know of the mistake via a comment
 but always first please check the YouTube description box. I can't actually amend a
 video and if I replace it I lose all the comments, likes and views. While I can upload a corrected
 one that does take a lot of time and also that means I've got a lot of versions of the
 same video on my YouTube channel which can be very confusing for people. Ok so now using
 the bust depth at the side seam measurement that's number 17 on the measurement chart
 measure down from point J towards point D and mark point K. We'll now mark the rest
 of the bust line because from H2 to the bust point is part of our bust line but we'll mark
 the rest of it and in that process we'll get the angle for our side seam that will determine
 our bust cup. So first take your bust out front measurement that is from side seam to
 side seam and divide it by 2 and that's measurement number 5 on the chart. Then measure from H2
 to the bust point and subtract it from that measurement. Take the remaining amount and
 measure from the bust point towards and through point K and mark point K2. Now I will repeat
 this using Dee Dee's measurements in the next slide so you're clear on what we're doing.
 Dee Dee's front bust arc is 49 and a half centimetres. Divide that by 2 for the half
 block we get 24 and 3/4 centimetres. From H2 to the bust point which is part of the
 bust line is 9 and a half centimetres. Therefore 24 and 3/4 minus 9 and a half centimetres is
 15 and a quarter centimetres and that's the remainder we need from the bust point out.
 So I'll measure from the bust point towards and through point K for 15 and a quarter centimetres
 and mark point K2. While it does look very angular on the block I have just placed those
 exact lines on Dee Dee's twile and on the twile it doesn't look angular. The bust is
 actually a curve but those straight lines are good enough for fitting purposes. Now if
 you have a large bust chances are that that line will look even more angular. There's
 a straight line from the centre front to the bust point but then it goes way up on an angle.
 On my body form it actually looks straight and parallel to the floor. On my body it's
 actually angled up a bit but that's because I've put on weight and the block that fits
 my body form doesn't fit me so well at the moment.
 So the next measurement is the side length number 9 on the measurement chart. We'll
 draw the side seam and in the process we'll get the side seam angle that will give us
 our bust cup. So taking your side seam length measurement measure from point J through
 point K2 in a straight line and at the end of that measurement mark point L.
 Moving up to the across chest measurement which is number 22 on the chart. You usually measure
 from armhole to armhole and divide by 2. Now when you measure the across chest you should
 have noted the depth where you took that measurement how far down from the centre front you took
 that measurement. For the milage about 2/3 of the way down from the centre front neck
 and the upper bust is a good place. I took it a little bit lower than that for DD. Now
 using the across chest measurement measure inwards from the centre front line and at
 right angles to the centre front line and mark point M.
 We will draw the armhole next but first we'll just draw a guideline to assist in that. We
 don't want to dip below this line when drawing the curve. So from J draw a guideline for
 about 8 centimetres and that line has to be at right angles to the side seam. Mark the
 end point J2. Taking a French curve draw the armhole from the shoulder point G to touch
 the across chest point M and finishing at point J at the underarm upper bust. Now this
 block currently has no ease so that armhole curve is for the milage.
 So now the neck line curve. Taking the French curve again draw a line from point I at the
 high neck and down to point E at the centre front. Now don't dip below the E to E2 line
 however you can cut into the E to E2 line. Now with DD her neck curve the pink line does
 not cut into that E to E2 line but the green line shows how standard shaping works for
 the neck line. Now I will show you in the next slide on my block because in this regard
 I am standard and DD is not. So I have enlarged my block and you can just see the top of it
 and this is my neck line curve. For my curve it goes in a quarter of a centimetre beyond
 the E to E2 line and this is actually what a lot of block making instructions say for
 the standard body so it seems that I am standard in this regard the shape of my neck whereas
 DD is not standard. Now we will do the waist. First we will place the first dart leg. Measure
 from point H2 to the bust point. Take that measurement and subtract 2 centimetres. Using
 the total measure on the waist line from point A towards point D and mark point N. Now draw
 a line from the bust point through point N and a quarter of a centimetre past point N.
 Mark point N2. The reason for extending the dart leg below the waist is to get a curve
 for the waist rather than a straight line and you will see how that works at the end when
 we do the waist shaping. Now draw a guideline from point L at the side seam to point N2,
 the first dart leg. This is our waistline or part of our waistline because A to N2 is
 also part of the waistline but we need to determine how much of this L to N2 is access
 to requirements and put the excess into the dart. So take your waist measurement and divide
 it by 4. We will call this value X. Now measure from point A to point N2 and we will call
 that value Y. Take X and subtract Y, giving us the value of Z or Z if you are American.
 Using the value of Z, measure from point L at the side seam along that guideline that
 you have just drawn and mark point O. Now measure the first dart leg from the bust
 point to N2. We need to make our second dart leg the same length. So draw the second dart
 leg from the bust point through point O and mark point O2. Now draw a line from point L
 to point O2. At the moment we are drawing a straight line but we will later make that
 a bit curved. We will do that at the end after we have converted it to a two dart block.
 Now the main shape of the block is finished. That is without any ease and we actually
 have not drawn in the waistline properly. We will finish the waistline curve later when
 we make it a two dart block. So we want to add two and a half centimetres
 ease in the waist across the whole block, which is a bit hard to divide evenly. We will
 add one centimetre ease to the front and one and a half to the back. For the half front
 that is half a centimetre. So measure half a centimetre from point L as a continuation
 of the O2 to L line and mark point L2. This is the waist side seam point for the sleeveless
 and the standard block. Now we will add ease at the upper bust for the sleeveless block.
 We will also lower the armhole one and a half centimetres. The upper bust ease for the sleeveless
 block is seven and a half centimetres across the whole block. We will add two thirds of
 that to the back and one third to the front. So we will add five centimetres to the back
 and two and a half centimetres to the front. For the half front that is 1.25 centimetres
 ease. Note that the J to L side seam line is the muleage side seam line. So measure down
 on the J to L muleage side seam line for one and a half centimetres to lower the armhole.
 Then measure out from that point and at right angles to the muleage side seam line for one
 point two five centimetres and mark point J3. Now draw a line which will be the sleeveless
 block side seam line from point J3 towards and through point L2 at the waist. Make the
 length of that line your body side seam length minus 1.5 centimetres. Mark the end of that
 line point L3. Now finish the armhole curve for the sleeveless block using a French curve.
 You generally need a little bit of a straight line to begin with at the underarm so that
 you get a smooth curve between the back and the front when they are joined but just draw
 a curve from point J3 to blend at point M at a cross chest. The purple stroke line is
 the muleage outline and the blue stroke line is the sleeveless block. The muleage is drawn
 from point G at the shoulder to point J at the underarm. The muleage side seam is from
 point J to point L at the waist then to point O2 at the waist dart line. The sleeveless
 block is from point G at the shoulder to point J3 at the underarm to point L3 at the side
 waist and then to point O2 at the waist dart line. The ease for the sleeveless block is
 highlighted in yellow. Of course this is the half front so there is the same amount on
 the other side plus there's the ease in the back. Now we'll draw in the side seam for
 the standard block to be used with sleeves so we'll add some ease and also lower the
 arm hole a little. Ease for the standard block is usually 12 and a half centimetres in the
 upper bust. If you are wondering about this amount of ease and think it may be too much
 I suggest you watch my video on ease as part of the bodice block essentials where I show
 that this is the standard amount at the upper bust for the standard block. Just note though
 that we are adding this at the upper bust there will be less ease in the bust. If you
 have a look you can see the wedge of ease in the sleeveless block narrows as it moves
 toward the waist. There is less ease in the bust than there is in the upper bust. So 12
 and a half centimetres ease but as we're using the sleeveless block as our starting point
 and we've already added 7 and a half centimetres there we need 5 centimetres more. A third
 of that to the front two thirds to the back. This works out at 1.6 centimetres for the
 front. Half that and round it down slightly and we end up with three quarters of a centimetre
 ease extra for the front. So first we'll lower the arm hole one centimetre measuring down
 the J3 to L3 sleeveless side seam line for three quarters of a centimetre. Mark point
 J5. Draw a line from J5 at the underarm to point L3 at the waist. This is the side seam
 line for the standard or block to be used with sleeves. Before drawing the arm hole for the
 sleeveled block we'll add a bit to both the shoulder length and the across chest measurements.
 There is some ease added for sleeve movement. Extend the shoulder line from point G by one
 centimetre and mark point G2. Then extend the across chest line past point M for a half centimetre
 and mark point M2. Using a French curve draw a line to draw the arm hole for the sleeve
 block from G2 through M2 and to touch point J5 at the underarm. You may not be able to
 draw it in one path. You may have to draw two lines and blend them. The green shaded
 bit shows what we've added to the sleeve block. Now we can measure how much ease we have ended
 up with at the bus level for the front here and when we draft the back we can check the
 back amount and add it together. You should end up with somewhere between 5 to 7 centimetres
 ease for the sleeveless block and about 7.5 or 8.5 centimetres ease for the block with
 sleeves. That's the total across the whole block. If when you make your 12 this is too
 much then shave a little bit off the wedge front and back for both either the sleeveless
 and the sleeve block if that's what you want to do. If you do that make sure you taper
 it down to point L3 at the waist. The way we're going to convert this into a 2 dart block
 is by cutting and spreading. First draw a guideline below the waistline and parallel
 to it that is half a centimetre below the waistline. You can see that on the left most
 image. Still looking at the image on the left from the side seam cut along the bust line
 to the bust point. Then cut up through the left waist dart leg to the bust point but
 leave a hinge don't separate that piece completely. In the second image I've coloured that cut
 piece in yellow so it's easy to see what's going on. That piece is pivoted down pivoted
 on the hinge left at the bust point so that the side seam touches the line below the waist.
 On the right I'm showing you that you need to put paper underneath the opened up section
 and stick it down. That opened up section is the side seam dart and the waist dart has
 reduced in size and the blue lines show that what the waist dart is now. On the left side
 is what we ended up with on the last slide. In the middle graphic you can see that I've
 just drawn straight lines to close both of the darts. We will finish off the darts in
 the next slide but I'll be working with the white copy on the end so that it's less busy
 less distractions. Again I'll be working with just the sleeveless block but the method
 is the same for any dart. So now we'll finish off the shaping of the side seam dart. As
 shown in the example A locate the middle of the side seam dart and draw a guard line from
 the bust point through that point. As shown in example B continue to straight line from
 the armhole past the top dart leg to touch that mid dart line. That is a straight line
 from the under arm point to touch the mid dart line. Then as shown in C draw a line from
 the bottom dart leg to meet that previous point. In this case it will not be or it probably
 won't be a continuation of the line from the waist. Finishing it off this way will
 mean that it will fall downwards and the edges will be flush. If you want to fold it upwards
 which is not usual you do it the opposite way. As in you continue the line from the waist
 upwards a straight line in continuation of the side seam upwards to meet the mid dart
 line. Then you draw a line from the top dart leg to meet that point. In this case that
 line downwards will not be a continuation of the line from the under arm point. Now you
 could alternatively just fold the paper by which I mean you close the dart on the paper
 and then you cut away the excess. I hate folding paper I prefer to use this method.
 Now on the left is the last image from the last slide. In the middle is the final shape
 of the block including those lines from C. Now on the right is my block to show you how
 different it will look with a bigger bust and a bigger side seam dart. But the shaping
 was done the same. The side seam line is continued from the armhole in a straight line to the
 mid dart. Then a line is drawn up from the bottom dart leg to meet that previous point.
 The shaping done this way means that the dart will close downwards towards the waist not
 up towards the armhole. Generally you don't want darts to close upwards towards the armhole
 because that creates a little pocket there so for when you do the washing you can catch
 fluff in there etc. I suppose you could catch it downwards too but that would fall out.
 But anyway side seam darts tend to fold down towards the waist. Just another note the green
 dashed lines on my block is the waist shaping done to fold upwards. So the line is drawn
 from the waist first to meet the mid dart line and then the second line is drawn from
 the top dart leg to meet that point. Now for the waist shaping as shown in image
 one find the mid dart point again the waist dart the middle of it and draw a line from
 the bust point through the mid dart point. Remember that we drop the dart legs for three
 sixteenths of an inch and we also drop the side seam point earlier as well. So we want
 a gentle curve for the waist using a French curve. Look at figure two and make the first
 part of the waistline from the centre front completely straight for a little bit. We want
 that to be at a right angle. We don't want to dip or a valley at the centre front at
 the waistline but curve it down to the dart leg point and continue that curve till it
 touches the mid dart line. Then turn flip flip the French curve over so you've got
 a reflected curve and curve that line back up again. You also want there to be a right
 angle at the side seam so that it will true better with the back block that's shown by
 that blue square showing that that side seam point there is squared. On the left is an
 example of how the waistline would look after the dart was closed if we didn't do that
 curving and the image on the right shows you why we do that curving. In this slide I'm
 showing you that the curve I drew gives a nice flow through at the side seam from the
 back block to the front. The last thing to do is pull the dart points back a little bit
 from the bust point. The bigger the bust the bigger the size the further away generally
 the dart point is from the bust point. A general guide or a starting point is given here on
 the screen. You'll probably need to pause and have a look I'm not going to read all
 of those out. Now these are only general guides and only go up to a decup. Maybe you could
 look at your clothes and measure how far away your dart points are from your apex that is
 assuming that the dart points on your clothes suit your body. Measure along the mid dart
 line away from the bust point and place the new dart point on the mid dart line and redraw
 your darts. I recommend you draw all the lines from the block on the twile. Doing this means
 you can see where you've made mistakes and also it's much easier to see where the adjustments
 need to be made. From here on is some general information on truing the front and the back
 and finishing off your block. You need to do this after drafting both the front and the
 back. I'm not using the block I drafted for Didi in these following slides. I'm using
 a standard block. When we finish both the front and the back we need to check that the lengths
 of adjacent pieces match and also check that there is a nice flow through in the curves.
 If you need to increase the length of anything you may need to stick on little bits of paper.
 I'm not going to be doing that in my example but just be aware you may have to. So firstly
 we'll do the side seam. Put the back and front blocks together at the side seam waist. Check
 that there's a smooth curve at the waist. Then check the side seam length. Firstly from
 the waist up to the dart leg. Then check that the remainder matches up. Check that there
 is a smooth curve through the armhole. Then match the front and back at the high neck point to check
 the neckline curve. While you're there mark the shoulder dart placement from the back block onto
 the front block so that you can check the shoulder length. Move the front block to the other dart
 leg and check the shoulder lengths are the same. This is especially important when drafting the
 three options together the melage and the sleeveless and the sleeve you may have traced off the sleeveless
 block on the front and then accidentally trace off the sleeve version in the back. So definitely
 always check your shoulder lengths match. Then check the flow through curve of the armhole.
 When you have your final front and back blocks don't forget to mark and notch the dart legs.
 Label the block. Put all the relevant information on it maybe including the date you drafted it.
 Note whether it's a sleeveless block or the sleeve block or the melage.
 Now I did hear a pattern maker say that you don't put the grainline on the block.
 You put that on the pattern but I like to have it on my block to remind me to put it on the pattern.
 Sometimes I forget and then I get to putting my pattern pieces on the fabric and realize I
 haven't drawn the grainline on there. So yes I definitely prefer to put the grainline on the block
 as a reminder. So here are some final blocks not DDs but this is what the final blocks look like.
 These ones don't have the bust line or upper bust mark. That was needed during the drafting process
 for making the twile and getting the measurements right. On the actual blocks you don't need them.
 Today 16th of March I'm uploading the two revised bodice front videos not at the same time
 the metric probably an hour or two after the imperial version. In the next few days I'll be
 finishing and uploading the bodice back revised videos. From April to July or August I'll be
 uploading the videos that have I outlined in the video titled planned content in 2022. The first
 one should be up on Sunday 27th of March. If you find my content useful please consider buying me a
 cup of coffee on Ko-fi. A link can be found in my YouTube header. At the moment the money I get
 only covers my costs and I work on creating content part-time around my day job. If I eventually
 get enough support I can work on this full time and post more content. Thank you. This is Maria from
 going back to making.com. Ciao.
