 ♪ Beautiful dream away, come to me ♪
 Hello, this is Maria from Just Pat, making a talk.
 This video is a revision of the bodice instructions
 I uploaded in April 2021.
 This video uses metric measurements
 and the background graphic has a centimeter grid.
 I have also uploaded an imperial version.
 This video is the instructions for the bodice back.
 I have recently uploaded the bodice front video
 in both imperial and metric.
 I have also recently uploaded two other videos,
 planned content for 2022 and variations on a silhouette.
 Unfortunately, the time schedule I had set out
 in the planned content video is a little bit behind,
 so don't rely on that.
 If you find my content useful,
 please consider buying me a cup of coffee on Ko-fi.
 The link can be found in my channel header.
 Regarding the bodice block booklet,
 that is the PDF or ePub,
 the written instructions that you can flick through
 at your own pace.
 When that is ready, I will put a link to it
 in the description box of the YouTube video,
 and that is the description box of both the bodice front
 and the bodice back.
 You should have already watched the bodice block
 essential videos and drafted the bodice front
 before drafting the bodice back.
 The bodice block essential videos can be found
 in my bodice block essentials playlist.
 Part six covers the measurements needed
 to draft the bodice blocks front and back.
 In that measurements video, there were a couple
 of measurements shown incorrectly,
 but that was explained in the updated bodice front video.
 That is the bodice front instructions uploaded in March 2022.
 There are now three versions
 of my bodice block instructions on YouTube,
 the first two are superseded.
 So make sure that the bodice front you drafted
 was using the instructions uploaded in March 2022,
 and not one of those previous versions.
 I will be using DD again to show the measurements
 to the left while drafting to the right.
 On the left is one of the outcomes of this video,
 that is DD's back sleeveless block.
 On the right is DD's front sleeveless block,
 which makes the sleeveless block set.
 I will actually first draft a middleage for DD,
 then make the adjustments for the sleeveless block,
 then make further adjustments for the sleeved block.
 My recommendation is that you test
 your sleeveless block first.
 This is a comparison to show you
 how different blocks can look,
 so that you are aware that your block
 may look significantly different
 to the one I'm drafting for DD.
 DD's block is to the left, mine is in the middle,
 and on the right one is on top of the other
 to better compare them.
 As should be expected,
 the shape of the block shows you the shape of the person.
 Now having said that,
 you really need the front block as well
 to get a complete picture of the person's shape.
 For example, looking at DD's back block and mine,
 you may think DD has a larger bust,
 and I have a square of figure,
 since DD has 20 centimetres difference
 between her upper bust and waist,
 and I have only 12 centimetres difference
 between my upper bust and waist.
 But this is not taking into account
 the bust measurement and the bust cup,
 and they are more obvious on the bodice front.
 I also have square of shoulders than DD,
 and my torso length is shorter.
 Your block will have differences
 that will reflect your individual measurements
 and your body shape.
 In this video, I'll be drafting the half back,
 which means if any measurements were taken
 across the full back,
 they have to be divided by two.
 If you have an asymmetric figure,
 you may eventually want to figure out
 how each side is different
 and work with the full back
 instead of the half back when drafting your patterns.
 I will be referring to the measurement chart,
 which can be downloaded from my website.
 You will probably already have used it
 to take your measurements and draft the front block.
 If you need another copy,
 there will be a link in the YouTube description box
 below the video.
 Okay, so let's start drafting.
 Firstly, on your paper,
 draw a horizontal line across the bottom of your paper
 to indicate the waist.
 No measurement as yet,
 this is a reference line,
 and we'll start drafting from this point upwards.
 So the first measurement is the full length back.
 This is actually measurement number 23 on my measurement chart.
 It's a first measurement in the back section.
 Using your full length back measurement,
 draw a vertical line from point A
 on your waistline up to point B.
 Make sure the vertical line is at right angles
 to the horizontal waist guideline.
 Mark points A and B.
 The measurement, as shown on DD,
 is taken from the high neck point
 to the waist in a straight line.
 The next measurement is the upper bust arc back,
 measurement number three on the chart.
 The upper bust arc back measurement
 is from side seam to side seam at the underarm level.
 You need to divide the upper bust arc back
 in two for the half block.
 Using that measurement,
 measure across from point B in a straight horizontal line,
 making sure it's at right angles
 to the A to B line and mark point C.
 Then finish the rectangle drawing a line
 from C back down to the waist and mark point D.
 Make sure all the corners are right angles.
 Now to be clear, this is just the body measurement, no ease.
 We will add the ease right at the very end.
 Next is the center back length measurement.
 Measurement number 24 on the chart.
 Using your center back measurement,
 measure up from point A on that A to B line
 and mark point E.
 Then draw a line at right angles to the A to E line
 for about 10 centimetres and mark the end of that line point E2.
 This is just a guideline
 and will help us draw the neck curve later.
 As it's a guideline, it doesn't need to be an exact length,
 which is why I say for about 10 centimetres.
 Next is the across shoulder back measurement number 25
 on the chart.
 Your across shoulder is measured either from the center back
 to the shoulder tip or from shoulder tip to shoulder tip and divided by two.
 Using the half measurement from center back to the shoulder tip,
 measure across from point B towards point C and mark point F.
 Then draw another guideline.
 Again, because it's a guideline,
 it does not need to be an exact length,
 about eight to 10 centimetres down from point F
 at right angles to the B to F line
 and mark the end of that line F2.
 Now the back neck measurement.
 This is measurement number 30 on the chart.
 The back neck measurement is one of those
 where you could take the half measurement from the center back
 to the high neck point or measure from high neck point to high neck point
 and divide by two.
 But using that half measurement,
 measure from point B on the B to C line and mark point G.
 Draw another guideline from point G at right angles to the B, C line
 and mark point G2.
 The length of that line can be about eight to ten centimetres long.
 Next is the shoulder slope back,
 measurement number 26 on the chart.
 Using your shoulder slope back measurement,
 measure up diagonally from point A on the waistline
 to touch the F to F2 guideline,
 where it touches that guideline, mark point H.
 Now just a point here.
 Some instructions say to add a quarter of an centimetre
 to your shoulder slope measurement for some ease.
 I just find that when you take those measurements two or three times,
 you can be out a quarter of a centimetre each time you take it.
 My opinion is just take the body measurement.
 When you make the 12, it should be obvious if you need a little bit more
 and you can add it before you finalise your block.
 Now a few slides back, we marked the back neck measurement from B to G.
 Now the issue is that we've taken the measurement of a curve
 and if you look at DD and left,
 the curve is from the centre back neck to the high neck point
 and we're plotting it on the block as a straight line.
 So let's look at the next slide to see what the problem may be for some people.
 Now the neck curve we need to draw is from point E to point G.
 For DD, that curve from E to G ends up being much longer
 than the measurement from B to G.
 Now you may ask why then do the instructions plotted as a straight line
 if the curve ends up being much longer?
 Well for most people, or at least those who fall into the standard category,
 it won't be a problem, it will work out.
 DD actually happens to be non-standard.
 I'll show you how it does work out for most people in the next slide with my block.
 In my case, the length of the curve from E to G on the right
 is only slightly longer than the straight line from B to G,
 which is my original measurement.
 And that bit of extra length gained in that curve is needed for ease.
 This is one of the rare instances where I fall into the standard category.
 And that standard is that there's only about one and a half centimetres
 between points E and B.
 What that means is I have only about one and a half centimetres difference
 between my centre back and full length back measurements.
 The green shaded areas on this slide shows the depth of the back net curve.
 You can see that the shaded area on the left, my net curve is quite shallow.
 With that shallow curve, the net curve ends up being slightly longer
 than the body measurement and that slight increase is needed for ease.
 For those who have more than that one and a half centimetre difference
 between the centre back and the full length back,
 they'll end up with a deep curve from E to G
 that ends up longer than their back net measurement,
 as it does for Dee Dee on the right.
 She has nearly three centimetres difference
 between her centre back and full length back measurements.
 So if you fall into that category with a large difference
 between your centre back and full length back measurements,
 you'll need to do some adjusting and finessing
 so that you don't end up with a gaping back neck
 or that your high neck point doesn't end up too far out on your shoulder.
 So basically, you'll have to draw that neckline curve in and measure it.
 If the measurement from E to G ends up being a lot longer
 or quite a bit longer than your actual measurement,
 you'll need to move point G over to the left and try again.
 And you'll need to finess it until you get the curve
 from E to G to be about half a centimetre longer than your body measurement.
 The next measurement is the shoulder length,
 measurement number eight on the chart.
 Take your shoulder length measurement
 and add one and a quarter centimetres for a dart.
 Using that total, shoulder length plus dart amount,
 draw a line from point G at the neck to pass through point H,
 the shoulder slope point, and mark the end of that line, point I.
 I have actually put point I in brackets
 because the capital I looks like a one
 and the lower case seems to get lost.
 So that's the only reason that it's there in brackets.
 Now mark the midway point on the shoulder line.
 So midway between point G and I
 and mark that midpoint J.
 Now the waist measurement, measurement number seven on the chart.
 Moving down to your waistline,
 take your waist measurement, that's your whole body circumference,
 and divide it by four.
 Then add three and three quarter centimetres for the dart.
 Taking that total, waist plus dart,
 measure from point A towards point D and mark point K.
 Again, no ease at the moment.
 We're going to add ease to the upper bust, bust, and waist at the very end.
 From point K, measure down below the waistline
 at right angles to the waistline and mark point K2.
 The amount you measure down is a half a centimetre.
 This will help with a waist curving
 because the waist is not a completely straight line.
 Now using your side seam length measurement,
 that's measurement number nine on the measurement chart,
 measure from point K2 just below the waist
 up to touch the C to D line.
 Where it touches the C to D line, mark point L1.
 Then draw a guideline inwards for about five centimetres
 from point L1 at right angles to the side seam line and mark point L2.
 So this slide is just to remind you that when we drafted the front,
 we did a similar thing in taking the waist down below the waistline
 at the side seam for a smidge.
 Then curving that up to blend to the straight waistline.
 Doing this means that when we true the front and back,
 we end up with a smooth flow through, as shown to the right at the top,
 rather than the angular line shown at the bottom.
 Now in drawing that side seam line up from the waist to touch the C to D line,
 we have now defined the underarm point.
 Point L1 is the underarm point.
 This means we can now draw in the upper bust line.
 So draw a line at right angles to the centre back line to touch point L1.
 You can write upper bust on that line if you wish.
 Next take your bust depth at side seam measurement.
 That's number 17 on the measurement chart.
 Measure down from the underarm point L1 and mark the bust level.
 Draw a line from the centre back at right angles to the centre back line
 to touch this point.
 Now I actually neglected to give that point a letter,
 but it should be okay because we are drawing the line there.
 So now the across back measurement, measurement number 31 on the chart.
 In my instructions for taking the measurements,
 I said to take the across back measurement about halfway between the centre back neck
 and the upper bust line.
 So measure from point E, the centre back neck point,
 to the upper bust line and divide that by two.
 Using that measurement mark point M, which is the placement for the across back measurement.
 Then using the across back measurement, which is on your chart,
 divided by two for the half block,
 measure inwards from point M and mark point N.
 Now you can take a French curve and draw the armhole from point I at the shoulder
 through point N at the across back down to point L1 at the underarm.
 For DD, I can draw that in one pass with a curve.
 You may need to draw two curves and blend it depending on your ruler.
 Now if you end up with what seems to be a really large back armhole
 and you have a rounded upper back,
 chances are you'll have some excess E's in the back armhole.
 What you'll need to do in the fitting stage is to pinch the excess E's out and measure it.
 Then move that excess into the shoulder dart.
 We haven't constructed the shoulder dart yet, but we'll be doing that in a bit.
 However, that fitting does need to be done in the 12 stage
 because it's hard to determine what size dart you need in the shoulder.
 So you always start with the basic amount,
 and in the 12 fitting stage you can increase that shoulder dart width.
 Now we're going to place the waist dart and mark the width of the dart
 and draw the center line of the waist dart up to the upper bust.
 Now if you're unsure of where to place your back waist dart,
 there are some general guides on the screen.
 Basically between 7cm and 9cm from the center back waist.
 When you make your 12, see if you like it there and move it accordingly if you don't.
 So taking that measurement, measure across from point A on the waistline towards point D and mark point O.
 Then measure from point O for the width of the dart and mark point P.
 We allowed for a 3 and 3/4 centimeter dart when we marked point K,
 so from point O to P should be 3 and 3/4 centimetres.
 In the middle of that dart, draw a straight line up to the upper bust line and mark point Q.
 Make sure that that line from the middle of the dart to point Q is at right angles to the waistline.
 Draw the first dart leg from point Q through point O and go a half a centimetre below the waistline and mark point O2.
 Draw the other dart line from point Q to go through point P to go half a centimetre below the waistline and mark point P2.
 Check that those two lines are the same length, they need to be the same length.
 Draw the waist curve in as shown, you will need to extend the mid dart line down below the waist.
 Then with the help of a curved ruler, draw a curved line from point A at centre back to pass through point O2 and touch the mid dart line that you've extended down.
 Then turn the ruler over to get the same curve from the mid dart line through point P2.
 Then draw another curve from point P2 to the side seam point K2.
 In the measurement video, I suggested that you take your back armhole depth a number of ways for checking purposes.
 These are measurements 27, 28 and 29 on the chart.
 So centre back to upper bust, high neck point to upper bust and shoulder point to upper bust on the shoulder slope line.
 Now we didn't actually use any of these measurements to get the armhole depth, but now it's the time to check those measurements that they do work out.
 It would just give you an idea of whether you've made some major mistakes.
 Now if you do actually plot those and they all end up on the same level but not at the upper bust line,
 then what you'd need to do is check your shoulder slope and full length front before continuing.
 If after checking the shoulder slope and the full length front you come up with the same measurements,
 then just draft the block and draw the lines on it and check it at the 12 stage.
 Now we'll construct the shoulder dart.
 Draw a guideline from point Q, the waist dart point and point J on the mid shoulder.
 From point J, measure down that guideline for seven and a half centimetres and mark the dart point R.
 Now when I say seven and a half centimetres, with all these things, that's the starting point that may need to be finessed.
 It may be different from person to person.
 Didi needed a dart that was longer than seven and a half centimetres.
 Now draw a dart along the shoulder line with J at the centre and make that dart one and a quarter centimetres wide.
 Now draw a dart leg from point R through point S and go beyond point S for a quarter of a centimetre and mark point U.
 Measure that dart leg from point R to point U and draw the second dart leg to match that length.
 So from point R through point T and mark point V. Also to be able to finish off the shaping of the shoulder line,
 extend the mid dart line out for a couple of centimetres.
 Then to draw the shoulder line, start at point I and draw a straight line to point V and continue until you reach the mid dart line.
 Then draw from the mid dart line to point U, then to point G.
 On the left is the final shape of the milage because it still doesn't have any E's.
 And the shape is from point A at the waist, up to point E, centre back neck point,
 around the neck curve to point G at the shoulder, then to point I through points U and V on the shoulder to point I.
 The armhole curve down to L1, down to the waist K2 and then the waist curve back to A.
 And on the right in pink is the shape without the emphasis on the points.
 Now this is basically your milage for the back.
 If you do sew this up and it doesn't fit, part of that will be that you have no E's.
 You really do need a little bit of E's in order to be able to do it up.
 It will be difficult to pin up if it's made to your exact measurements.
 So now we'll add E's to the side seam.
 If you look at the graphic on the right-hand side, the pink line, the pink side seam line is the milage side seam
 and the blue line to the right is the side seam line for the sleeveless block after E's is added.
 More E's is added to the upper bust and that tapers down on an angle to the waist where less E's is added.
 The waist E's, which is the same for the sleeveless and sleeves block, is two and a half centimetre across the whole block.
 We're not going to distribute that evenly just because 0.63 of a centimetre is not that easy to measure.
 We added one centimetre to the front which leaves one and a half centimetres for the back.
 That's three-quarters of a centimetre for the half block.
 So move out from the waist side seam point K2 for three-quarters of a centimetre and mark point X.
 For the upper busties, the sleeveless block will have seven and a half centimetres and that's across the whole block.
 We've already added two and a half of that to the front.
 So now there is a remainder of five centimetres E's to add to the back.
 That is two and a half centimetres for the half block.
 We will also lower the armhole one and a half centimetres.
 So firstly, measure down from point L1 on the L1 to K line to drop the armhole one and a half centimetres.
 So measure down one and a half centimetres, then at right angles to the L1 to K line, measure out two and a half centimetres and mark point Y.
 Draw a line from point Y to point X. That is the side seam line for the sleeveless block.
 You'll then need to redraw the armhole from point N to point Y with a French curve.
 So I suggest that you measure the bust line to see how much E's you've ended up with at the bust level.
 You need to exclude the dart, obviously.
 Now you need to compare this measurement to your body bust art back and see what the difference is to see how much E's you've ended up with.
 So the standard amount, so the amount that you're aiming for or hoping for,
 two and a half to five centimetres for the sleeveless block and later on you can check again for the sleeved block.
 That's five to seven and a half centimetres for the sleeved block.
 Now again this is for the whole block. Two things here, you may end up with more or less E's than this.
 And in the next slide I'll show you how D, D and I end up with very different amounts of E's in the back at the bust.
 But even if you end up with a standard amount, it may be too much and even if you end up with a standard amount, it may not be enough.
 I plan on doing another video on E's but I'll quickly cover four reasons why it's difficult for me to give instructions that will give you
 the exact amount of E's that you need.
 One, you may have taken your measurements too loosely, so rather than your body measurements you already have E's built into your measurements
 and therefore you will end up with too much E's.
 Two, the smaller you are the less E's you need. We've added a set amount rather than a proportionate amount of E's
 and that is customary for block making instructions but five centimetres on a size four is a lot more proportionally
 than five centimetres for someone who is size 20.
 So the smaller you are, chances are the more E's that you will end up with more E's than you need.
 Third reason, the more fat you have, the more E's you need. Fat spreads and your body shape changes with movement.
 So for example, when you sit down, your fat will move around and something that is loose under the bust when you're standing can become tight when you sit down.
 So again, the slimmer you are, the less E's you need, the more fat you are, the more E's you need.
 And for the most important, E's is a very individual preference. Some people like things tight, some people cannot stand tight things.
 All of these things taken together mean that it's not possible for me to give instructions for adding E's that will suit every single person.
 So that is why I have this system where you draft them a large, you can see where the E's is that you're adding and you can choose to shave bits of that E's off if that E's is too much, and you'll also be able to add E's if it's not enough.
 So now I want to show you how Didi and I have ended up with very different amounts of E's at the bust, even though we added the same amount of E's at the upper bust and the waist.
 Now Didi and I have very similar bust measurements, but very different upper bust measurements and very different arcs.
 If you look at Didi's block on the left, her upper bust arc, that is from A to B, is larger than her bust arc, that is C to D. Note that D ends up to the left of the rectangle of her block.
 So the orange square indicates how much E's she has in the bust. She has some E's within that rectangle, that is her block base, plus some E's outside of it.
 She ends up with one and a half centimetre E's in the half back, which means three centimetres for the full back.
 My upper bust arc, A to B, is exactly the same measurement as my bust arc from C to D. So when I take into account that dart, it means D extends past my basic rectangle.
 So I end up with less than a quarter centimetre E's for the half back. That means less than half a centimetre for the full back compared to Didi's three centimetres for the full back, which is a significant difference.
 And you do need to add this to the front E's to see how much you've got for your total block, but I'm showing you that I have much less E's than Didi does at the bust level following the same instructions.
 On the right is my block from the last slide, where I showed you that I ended up with much less E's than Didi.
 Now if after I make a twirl, I decide that that E's is not enough, one way I can get some extra E's is to reduce the height of the dart.
 So on the left hand side you can see that if I reduce the height of the dart, I gained some extra E's. If that is still insufficient, I could also add some at the upper bust and draw a line from that point down to the waist to gain a bit more E's at the bust level.
 For those who may be wondering, isn't it possible to add E's at the bust without adding E's at the upper bust? Well yes, as shown by the dashed line around my block.
 If I extend at the bust level without increasing the upper bust, I end up with a curved side seam. There is nothing wrong with a curved side seam if you want to go that way.
 If you look at pattern making textbooks from 100 years ago or more, they used curves a lot. Well not only the side seam but the shoulder seam and the center front as well.
 In the graphic to the right, the red line is a curved shoulder seam and the blue line is a curved side seam for a jacket.
 There is nothing to stop you adding more E's at the bust and leaving an upper bust the same and having a curved side seam.
 But I'm not going to do that and so all of my instructions will continue with a straight side seam.
 So back to Dee Dee's block. This is where we left off. The pink line is her moolage and the blue line is her sleeveless block.
 So I ended up with far less E's than Dee Dee and I talked about adding E's for my situation if it's necessary.
 Chances are that Dee Dee has more E's than she needs. So if you like Dee Dee and would like to reduce your busties, come in from the underarm side seam for a quarter of an inch or so
 and remove the sliver shown in yellow. It goes down to nothing at the waist.
 This will reduce the busties by about half inch across the whole back.
 Of course this also reduces the E's at the upper bust but as I said for Dee Dee this is probably necessary.
 She probably has no fat on her whatsoever.
 You do not have to reduce the front E's the same amount as you reduce the back.
 Do check though how much busties you end up across the whole block and you may want to reduce the front a little as well.
 In the end you should have at least one inch E's at the bust level and that's assuming you've taken your body measurements correctly.
 That is firmly rather than loosely. Now someone might ask well we started by adding the E's unevenly.
 If we added the E's evenly to begin with Dee Dee's back would have not had so much E's.
 Well two things in response to that. One Dee Dee's E's would still need to be reduced and maybe in that case if the E's had been added evenly rather than two thirds to the back and one thirds to the front.
 She would need to take some of the front and the back. But number two well that would work okay for Dee Dee but not my figure.
 Remember I ended up with very little busties even after adding two thirds of the upper bust E's to the back.
 The reason I chose the distribution of E's works better for my type of figure is that my focus has always been on those who have large pattern making bust cups.
 That is smaller up and bust in proportion to the bust because that's where most block making instructions are lacking and don't end up with good results for the small upper bust and large bust figure.
 So now we'll add the E's for the sleeved block. I will just continue with Dee Dee's original sleeveless draft.
 I suggest that you make your sleeveless 12 first and fit it, make any changes and then continue with these steps from the final side seam line that may or may not include changes depending on whether you've reduced or increased the E's.
 The upper bust E's for the sleeved block is 12 and a half centimetres. We have already added seven and a half for the sleeveless block so there's five centimetres remaining. We'll add two thirds to the back and one third to the front as we did before.
 So that means three centimetres to the whole back, one and a half centimetres to the half block. The sleeved block is also lowered a little bit so from point y we'll measure down for one centimetre and out one and a half centimetre to point z.
 So measure down from point y on the sleeveless side seam line for one centimetre, then at right angles to that side seam line, measure out for one and a half centimetres and mark point z, then draw a line from point z to point K2 at the waist.
 To draw the armhole for the sleeved block, you'll need to add one centimetre to the shoulder length and a half a centimetre to the across chest as we did for the front. You will also need to draft the actual sleeve to go with the sleeved block.
 Now before you draft the sleeve, you may also want to check the amount of E's at the bust level for this sleeved block and make some adjustments so that you do only have between five and seven and a half centimetres E's at the bust level.
 If you are really thin with no body fat and you let things really closely fitting, you might want to reduce that down to between three and a half and five centimetres, but if you're large and you do have quite a bit of body fat, you may want to try the seven and a half centimetres.
 Here are three blocks for comparison purposes, with all of them having both sleeved and sleeveless versions. On the left is my block, in the middle is a standard block, in a size 14 and on the right is DD.
 I recommend you draw all the lines from the block on the twale. Doing this means you can see where you've made mistakes and also it's much easier to see where the adjustments need to be made.
 Now a note on the shoulder slope line, on your block it's not drawn to the shoulder tip because that's your across back measurement and in actual, in reality, when you sew up the dart, then point I would end up being where point H is on the block.
 But when you draw that line on your twale, it makes sense to draw it from the centre back waist to the actual shoulder tip. From here on is some general information on truing the front and the back and finishing off your block. This was also included in the bodice front video.
 When we finish both the front and the back, we need to check that the lengths of adjacent pieces match and also check that there is a nice flow through in the curves. If you need to increase the length of anything, you may need to stick on little bits of paper. I'm not going to be doing that in my example, but just be aware you may have to.
 So firstly, we'll do the side seam. Put the back and front blocks together at the side seam waist. Check that there's a smooth curve at the waist.
 Then check the side seam length. Firstly from the waist up to the dart leg. Then check that the remainder matches up.
 Check that there is a smooth curve through the armhole.
 Then match the front and back at the high neck point to check the neck line curve. While you're there, mark the shoulder dart placement from the back block onto the front block so that you can check the shoulder length.
 Move the front block to the other dart leg and check the shoulder lengths are the same. This is especially important when drafting the three options together, the malage and the sleeveless and the sleeve. You may have traced off the sleeveless block on the front and then accidentally trace off the sleeve version in the back.
 So definitely always check your shoulder lengths match.
 Then check the flow through curve of the armhole. When you have your final front and back blocks, don't forget to mark and notch the dart legs, label the block, put all the relevant information on it, maybe including the date you drafted it.
 Note whether it's a sleeveless block or the sleeveless block or the malage. Now I did hear a patent maker say that you don't put the grainline on the block, you put that on the pattern, but I like to have it on my block to remind me to put it on the pattern.
 Sometimes I forget and then I get to putting my pattern pieces on the fabric and realise I haven't drawn the grainline on there. So yes, I definitely prefer to put the grainline on the block as a reminder.
 So here are some final blocks, not DDs, but this is what the final blocks look like. These ones don't have the bust line or upper bust mark.
 That was needed during the drafting process for making the twile and getting the measurements right. On the actual blocks, you don't need them.
 So this is the end of the video. In April I hope to get up the bodice booklet as well as the first of the variation on the silhouette videos and that one is on contouring.
 When I have finished the bodice booklet, I will put a link to that in the YouTube description box below the video.
 Now if you find my content useful, consider buying me a cup of coffee on Ko-fi. The link can be found in my YouTube channel header.
 This is Maria from dresspeptmaker.com. Ciao.
