 [Music]
 Hello, this is Maria from dresspapandmaking.com.
 In this video I'm going to walk you through how to draft the sleeve block.
 You will need to have your bodice block front and back completed before you can draft the sleeve
 as we need the armhole measurements from those blocks.
 On the left is what the sleeve block will look like when I have finished drafting it.
 I will be using standard measurements to draft this block.
 On the right in orange is the bodice front and back, which would complete this block set.
 I have already created the videos for bodice front and back instructions.
 Note that this is the basic one-piece sleeve and it has a dart in the elbow.
 The green sleeve block on the right is my block, which as you may be able to see
 is a bit different in shape to the standard block on the left.
 If you are using your own individual measurements to draft your own custom block
 it may look a little different or significantly different to the one that I'm drafting.
 I actually want to cover a few things before we start drafting the sleeve block.
 Firstly, I want to talk about the seven measurements you need to draft this sleeve block.
 The first measurement is the length of the sleeve from the shoulder tip to the wrist with the arm bent.
 The second measurement is from the shoulder tip to the elbow,
 the third around the elbow with the arm bent.
 These three measurements are fairly straightforward.
 If your sleeve ends up short it's obvious and you add some length.
 If it ends up too tight in the elbow when you bend your arm you add to the elbow width.
 The other four measurements needed to draft the sleeve are the front armhole measurement
 from your front bodice block, the back armhole measurement from your back bodice block,
 the bicep measurement, which is around your bicep at the armhole level
 and the cap height from the shoulder tip to the bicep level.
 Now these four measurements are the building blocks of the sleeve cap.
 Taking these four measurements aren't necessarily difficult,
 except maybe the cap height can be because it's not necessarily that obvious,
 but it is the relationship between these four measurements
 that cause the most problem in drafting a well fitting one-piece fitted sleeve block.
 So let's first look at the definition of a fitted sleeve.
 There are two aspects to the fitted sleeve.
 The first one is the look, it follows the contours of the arm rather than flaring out.
 Minimal ease is added to the bicep to accommodate the arm in a close fit.
 The second aspect is the smooth head of the sleeve,
 so it also has minimal ease in the cap.
 It means there are no tucks and gathers.
 Only enough ease is put in to sew the sleeve into the curve of the armhole.
 So in the graphics shown, only A is a fitted sleeve,
 B has gathers in the sleeve cap, C flares out,
 D and E have gathers either or both in the bicep and the cap.
 Now, as I've said, the key for a fitted sleeve
 is having minimal ease in both the cap and the bicep.
 Now let's go back and have another look at the four measurements
 that we use to draft the sleeve cap.
 If you look at the graphic at the top right,
 you can see that the sleeve curve is built around a triangle.
 The three sides of the triangle are the back armhole,
 the front armhole and the bicep.
 The height of the triangle is the cap height.
 Now I have just enlarged the sleeve cap,
 so we can focus on the triangle,
 but I have not enlarged the inch grid,
 so the sleeve is not in proportion to the grid.
 The sleeve cap is shown by the black curved outline.
 The curve is built, as I said in the last slide,
 upon the triangle underneath.
 Now it should be obvious when you think about it,
 that you cannot draw this triangle using four measurements.
 There are actually three different combinations of these measurements
 that you could use to draw this triangle.
 Firstly, the back armhole, the front armhole and the bicep.
 Secondly, the back armhole, the front armhole and the cap height.
 Or thirdly, the bicep and the cap height.
 Now if you have a standard figure, or if you're lucky,
 the relationship between the cap height and the bicep
 just happened to magically work together to give you the right result.
 But if you're unlucky, it doesn't.
 Now on the left hand side, in example A,
 you have a triangle created with the three measurements
 back armhole, front armhole and bicep.
 In this case, in figure A, the cap height is what it is.
 Now if this was actually your back armhole measurement,
 your front armhole measurement and your bicep,
 all including some E's,
 but the cap height did not match the cap height on your body,
 well what would that mean?
 Well firstly, if that cap height was longer than your cap height,
 and so you had to reduce that cap height,
 you would have to extend the bicep,
 make that bicep larger and have more ease in the bicep.
 Otherwise, you wouldn't have enough room in that curve
 to sew it into the armhole.
 On the other hand, if this cap height was too low
 and you needed a higher cap height,
 you would have to make the back and front armhole lines longer,
 and in that case you'll have more ease
 than you need for a fitted sleeve in the sleeve cap.
 So you would either have to have gathers
 or you could put a dart in the sleeve cap.
 On the right, in example B,
 the triangle is created using the cap height
 and the front and back armhole measurements.
 Again, if this was your back armhole measurement,
 your front armhole measurement in your cap height,
 then the bicep is what it is.
 In this case, if your bicep was smaller than this measurement,
 you would just have to have extra ease in your bicep.
 If your bicep was larger than this,
 then you'd have to make the adjustment
 to the back and front armholes,
 and you'd end up with more ease in the sleeve cap
 than is ideal and you'd have to put in gathers
 or a dart in the cap.
 Now just a final note about the ideal amount of ease
 that you want in the sleeve cap to be able to ease it
 into the armhole.
 Most pattern making books I've referred to
 say that you need between one and a quarter
 and one and three quarter inches ease in the sleeve cap.
 But many fitting books I've read,
 written by dressmakers or solers,
 say that three quarters of an inch is sufficient
 and one inch is the maximum.
 So it seems pattern makers say more
 and dressmakers seem to think a little less.
 Now just a couple more notes before we start drafting the sleeve.
 The standard amount of ease you add to the bicep is two inches.
 If you have the upright posture of a standard figure,
 adding two inches ease to the bicep will help you,
 one end up with a desirable cap height,
 and two will also result in a comfortable sleeve.
 Now the issue of the ease in the bicep
 is that it's not only for bicep ease,
 it's ease for movement as well.
 When you stand with your arms straight down,
 the two inches ease in the bicep might be plenty.
 But then when you move your arms forward and up,
 the sleeve might become constrictive, uncomfortable or even painful.
 That's because garments behave differently with movement
 than they do when you're standing still.
 So depending on your body shape,
 your posture and other issues,
 it may mean that you need more than the standard
 two inches ease in the bicep.
 If sleeves and ready to wear clothing are generally
 constrictive when you move your arms forward and up,
 then you will probably have to add more than two inches
 standard ease in the bicep.
 You may need three inches, you may need more.
 I recommend that if you find ready to wear
 sleeves quite constrictive that you start with three inches.
 The issue with adding the three inches instead of two
 is that chances are you're going to end up with more ease
 than is desirable in the sleeve cap.
 And so you're going to end up with gathers
 or have to put a dart in the cap.
 So let's start drafting the sleeve.
 Draw a horizontal line from A to B
 that is eight inches longer than your bicep measurement.
 Note that I'm only showing you the top of the sleeve at the moment.
 You'll need a lot more paper below.
 Your paper needs to be a few inches longer than the length of your sleeve.
 In the middle of that A to B line,
 mark point C and draw a vertical guideline at right angles
 to the A to B line about seven inches high.
 Add your bicep measurement plus ease.
 The amount of ease will vary per person.
 Two inches ease for standard figures,
 but if sleeves and ready to wear clothing are usually constrictive,
 start with three inches ease.
 On the A to B line with point C at the centre,
 measure out your bicep measurement plus ease and mark points E and F.
 Add together your back armhole measurement plus a quarter inch ease
 to your front armhole measurement plus a quarter inch ease,
 then divide the total by two.
 Using that measurement, measure from point E
 up to touch the C to D line, mark point G.
 Don't draw a line, you're just measuring up and marking point G.
 Now starting at point G, take your back armhole measurement plus a quarter inch ease
 and measure towards the A to B line.
 If your back armhole measurement is smaller than the front,
 you're going to end up with a point to the right of point E.
 If your back armhole measurement is larger than your front,
 the point will end up to the left of point E.
 So mark that and label it point H.
 Now using your front armhole measurement plus quarter inch ease,
 measure from point G to touch the A to B line.
 If your front armhole measurement is smaller than the back,
 the point will end up as shown in the example to the left of point F.
 If your front armhole is larger, it will end up to the right of point F.
 Mark that new point I.
 Your bicep line is now from point H to point I.
 Using your body cap height measurement, measure up from point C and mark point J.
 If G and J are the same or very, very close,
 you won't have to do anything for this slide.
 If your point J is below point G as an example A,
 you will need to redraw the front and back armhole lines.
 So maintaining their same length, measure from point J towards the A to B line
 and mark new points H2 and I2.
 In this case, you have increased your bicep measurement.
 If J is above G as an example B on the right,
 redraw your front and back armholes from J to H and from J to I.
 In this case, an additional mount has been added on to the ease in the sleeve cap.
 If that's a large amount, you might not be able to actually ease it into the armhole
 and you may have to have gathers or a dart.
 Find the center of the H to I line and mark the point at the center C2.
 This is the center of your bicep line now.
 Draw a vertical line down from point C2 at right angles to the bicep line.
 The length of that line is the sleeve length minus the cap height.
 Mark the end point K and draw a wrist guideline at right angles to the C2 to K line.
 Using the shoulder tip to elbow measurement minus the cap height,
 measure down from C2 on the C2 to K line and mark point L.
 With point L at the center, draw a horizontal line at right angles to the C2 to K line.
 The length of this line is the elbow measurement, that is bent elbow plus ease.
 The amount of ease you will use will depend on how much ease you added to the bicep.
 If you added two inches ease to the bicep, add one and a quarter inch ease to the elbow.
 If you added three inches ease to the bicep, add one and three quarter inches to the elbow.
 If you added four inches ease to the bicep, add two inches ease to the elbow.
 This is just a note explaining why we added a proportional amount of ease to the elbow,
 depending on the ease added to the bicep.
 Otherwise, we might end up with a very tapered sleeve.
 If you add a lot of ease to say the bicep and not much to the elbow, it tapers
 and it can end up tapering down to an extreme so that you can't actually fit your hand in.
 It is best to add proportional ease.
 We will now draw the seam lines in.
 Draw a line from H at the bicep passing through point M at the elbow to meet the wrist line.
 Mark that point O. Draw another line from F through point N at the elbow
 to touch the wrist line and mark point P.
 Now we're going to start creating a dart at the elbow.
 Measure out from point M on the M to N elbow line for a quarter of an inch and mark point Q.
 Now measure down from M on the M to O line for one inch and mark point R.
 This is the dart width. Measure five eighths of an inch from point O on the O to P wrist line
 and mark point S. Now we're going to draw one of the dart legs.
 Measure the distance from Q to L on the elbow line and divide that by two.
 Using that value, measure from Q and mark the elbow point dart.
 Draw the second dart leg, the same length as the first one, starting at the dart point
 and going through point R and marking point T.
 Now draw a line from H to Q. Note that there may be a very slight difference
 between the length of this line to the length of F to N,
 but it will be very very minimal and it can be eased when stolen.
 Measure N to P and using that measurement, draw a line from T through point S and mark point U.
 Just to be clear here, we will be sewing. When we sew the sleeve up,
 we will be sewing the H to Q line to the F to N line and the T to S line to the N to P line,
 so they need to match in length. We need to draw the wrist line from U to P.
 You can draw it curved as shown or you can draw a straight line because a curved line is going to
 be much harder to hem. I'll leave that up to you. Now we're moving back up to the sleeve cap to
 drawing the curve or to prepare to drawing the curve at least. First, measure the back armhole line
 from G to H and divide it by four. Mark the three points, V, W and X as shown, moving from the bicep
 up to the head. Also divide the front armhole by four and mark the points Y, Z and A2 as shown,
 starting at the top and moving down to the bicep line. At point V, measure inwards at right angles
 to the straight line for quarter of an inch. At point W, measure out at right angles to the straight
 line for five sixteenths of an inch. At point X, measure out at right angles to the straight line
 for three-quarters of an inch. That's the back. For the front, at point Y, measure out at right
 angles to the straight line for seven-eighths of an inch. At point Z or Z, measure out at right
 angles to the straight line for a quarter of an inch. At point A2, measure inwards at right angles
 to the straight line for a half an inch. Using a French curve, draw the sleeve curve to touch
 the points as shown. You'll need to move the French curve and blend the lines together.
 Now we want to measure the sleeve cap curve and compare it to the armhole measurements.
 So measure the curve from A to G and check that against the back armhole measurement.
 Then measure from G to F and check that against the front armhole measurement.
 The measurement of the sleeve cap ideally will be between the whole sleeve cap from A to F,
 will ideally be between three-quarters of an inch and one-and-three-quarters of an inch,
 more than the total measurements of the back and front armhole added together.
 Now if the curve is a lot more than one-and-three-quarters of an inch or more than that,
 you won't be able to ease that into the curve of the armhole. So if you do have a lot more
 than the ideal, then you'll end up with gathers or you'll need to put in a dart if you don't
 want those gathers. If you do decide to go with the dart, you might want to leave just one-inch
 ease and incorporate the rest that's left over into the dart. The length of your dart, how far
 down your arm you need it to go, that's something you'll need to test at the 12 stage.
 Where the sleeve head curve crosses the straight lines, front and back mark notches,
 two notches in the back armhole and one in the front. We've now finished the sleeve block but
 we've got a few other things to do such as marking these notches at the front and back armhole onto
 the bodice front and bodice black and a couple of other things before we finish up. If you have
 drafted the block onto paper and are going to transfer it to cardboard, don't cut it out yet.
 You might need to make a slight change to the curve of the sleeve around the armhole,
 we'll do that in the upcoming slide when we bring in the bodice front and the bodice back.
 When you do have your final block, make sure you notch the sleeve head, the back and front
 armhole, the dart legs. Mark the elbow line and draw in the grain line at right angles to the bicep
 line and don't forget to label your block. Bring in your bodice back. Firstly, as shown in example A,
 check the beginning of the curve of the armhole, see that it matches the curve of the sleeve.
 You can fine tune the sleeve curve here. For example, shave a bit off or add a bit to match
 the curve of the armhole just for the first few inches. Then, as shown in example B, walk that
 bodice block along the sleeve until you reach the notches on the sleeve and transfer those notch
 markings onto the bodice back or not transfer so much. Yes, put it onto the bodice black so they
 appear on both the sleeve and the bodice back. You could if you wanted keep walking the bodice back
 until you reach the shoulder tip and mark that shoulder tip point on the sleeve to see how
 much ease there is left between that point and the shoulder notch. Now, bring in your bodice front.
 With the front, follow the same process as we just did with the back. Check for a similar curve for
 the first couple of inches and adjust the sleeve curve if necessary. After that, walk the bodice
 front and mark the armhole notch on the bodice front block. Then, keep walking the bodice front
 and mark where the shoulder tip would be on the sleeve curve and see how much ease that you have
 left in that sleeve curve. So, now you really have finished the sleeve block. At this point,
 if you've drafted onto paper, you can create a clean copy on cardboard. I do have one more thing
 to say though before finishing this video. Now, you may wonder what a corset has got to do with
 the sleeve. What I want to stress is the fit that you can get with the basic blocks are not as good
 a fit as you can get with added design lines. The quintessential example is the corset. You cannot
 get the fitting of a corset with a basic bodice block. The more design lines you add to a certain
 point, the better fit you can get. What I want to say is if you find it difficult to get the perfect
 fit in a one-piece fitted sleeve without having too much ease in the sleeve cap, without it being
 a bit constrictive in the armhole, don't sweat it. You'll get better result by designing clothes
 that fit your body. Put in the design ease that you need for comfort in the design stage rather
 than sweating about getting this block completely perfect because you can always add fullness in
 certain areas when you add a design line. You can create a two-piece sleeve. Yes, don't sweat
 getting a perfect fit. If you can't do it, you can't do it, design lines are your friend,
 added fullness is your friend, designing clothes that suit your body is the way that you need to go.
 So thanks for staying and watching and listening especially if you've got to the end. This is Maria
 from Dress Pattern Making. I will now be working on the pants block and should have that up in
 another week by Sunday 10th of May 2020. Ciao!
 ♪ Fastaway ♪
