 Hi, this is Maria from dresspattingmaking.com. This is part 6 that is the final part of the
 bodice block essential videos, measuring for the bodice block. After this, I will be remaking
 the bodice block instructions videos. This will take a few weeks as I am also finishing
 off the e-pub booklet to accompany the pants video and the e-pub booklet for the bodice instructions.
 If you find my tutorials useful, please consider buying me a cup of coffee on Ko-fi.
 Click on the link in my channel header. You can download the list of measurements from my website.
 I will put a link in the YouTube video description, but it won't be there immediately.
 This video is published. It will be put up the next day. I will be showing you the measurements
 on DD here and I will give some suggestions or tips on how to take some of those measurements.
 The person being measured needs to wear something close fitting, preferably something in stretch
 fabric that has negative ease so that you are taking the body measurements and you do need
 a person to help you take the measurements. This is a little bit confusing because for the rest of
 the video I am kind of talking to you as both the person who wants their measurement taken
 and the person who is taking the measurement. I will also bring in another form, my fiberglass
 form, to show how the upper bust looks on a larger bust because DD has a small bust cup.
 If you have not watched the bodice block essential videos, particularly the first one on the
 difference between bra bust cups and pattern making bust cups, I suggest you do so as it is useful
 to know before taking your measurements. I would actually recommend that you watch at least videos
 one to four. Now first I want to explain the 12 that DD is wearing. I measured DD on the left
 hand side and I made her a melage slash block. It is a block made to her measurements without ease.
 Now the reason I made it without ease is because my focus is on not making a garment,
 it's on taking measurements. When you take measurements you take the body measurements,
 the focus is on the body and I wanted this to fit her like a glove so we could see her body.
 Now when I say I'm a large with no ease I did actually add just a smidgen, a half an inch or
 so across the whole block or I wouldn't have been able to close it up properly but it certainly
 does not have anywhere near the three inches ease in the upper bust as a block would. So I drafted
 that melage block for her and that is shown on the right. All the coloured lines on the block
 are measurements I used to draft the block. For example the red line down the middle is the center
 front line. On this slide is the front melage and this is the back melage that I drafted for DD.
 Again all the lines that are showing are the measurements used to draft the block. I then took
 the bodice front and back and traced those blocks onto calico and transferred all the measurement
 lines from the block to the fabric with coloured markers. Therefore the lines on the twile that
 DD is wearing is an exact replica of what is on the block. I'll be working through the list of
 measurements that I've previously mentioned in the order they appear on the document and that's
 basically the order they're used in drafting the bodice block. So the first measurement is the upper
 bust. We'll be using the arcs that is the front arc and the back arc to actually draft the block
 but we need to start with defining where the upper bust is and it helps to look at the whole
 circumference measurement as well as the arcs. I have accentuated the original pink line on the
 twile to make it stand out but in case anyone has a problem with colours I will always put an arrow
 at at least one end of the measurement I'm talking about to make it clear which measurement
 I'm talking about. Now if you look at the front block on the right the upper bust is indicated
 by the pink double-headed arrow. On the block the upper bust line is a completely straight line
 at the armhole level from armhole to armhole. However on the body it does not look like a
 straight line. It is not horizontal to the floor not front on and certainly not when you look at
 the body in profile. Now on the back block on the right hand side it is again completely straight
 from armhole to armhole. On the body it can look like a completely straight line when you are looking
 on it from the back. However I will show you that if you turn it around sideways it does curve
 upwards at the armhole from the back to the front. So here it is in profile from the back to the
 front it curves up on an angle. Now look at my form on the right hand side. Compare and contrast
 my upper bust to DDS. The upper bust line on my block looks much more curved and it looks higher
 up than it does on DDS. There is also a lot more distance between the upper bust and the bust.
 The blue line is the bust line on both of those twiles. Now just to be clear my upper bust line
 on my block is completely straight also but on my body it looks much more curved than it does on DDS.
 Okay so now looking at my upper bust in profile on my body form you can see how moving from the
 back to the front is not a smooth curve there's an angular join. Now the trial looks quite baggy
 on my body form but if you look on the right hand side on me it is actually well fitting. It would
 be better it would actually be much better if I showed you my twile on my body in profile rather
 than on the body form but I put on a lot of weight since the beginning of COVID. I've done a lot less
 exercises last year and I've put on a lot of weight. While it doesn't bother me on my bottom
 hips, bust, legs etc. I really hate my fat arms at the moment. I have tuck shot lady arms and I'm
 not showing you me in my twile in profile. So two things. Firstly we're still talking about the upper
 bust at the moment not the bust but let me mention in passing that the bust line should be parallel
 to the floor and on my form it isn't. Just ignore that I'll be using DD when I talk about the bust
 line. Secondly the upper bust when you measure the circumference you would measure it as put on the
 right hand side. So in actual fact the whole circumference is likely to be a little bit different
 to the value of the two arcs added together but it won't be a huge amount. So you take the measurements
 as per the right hand side around the whole body at the underarm level when you are taking
 the circumference measurement. Now just a note although with the upper bust the two arcs won't
 necessarily add up to the exact upper bust circumference it might be a tad out the two bust arcs
 definitely should add up to the bust measurement. So again just for comparison purposes my upper
 bust on the left to DD's upper bust on the right. Now I suggest that after you take your upper
 bust measurement you take a piece of elastic that's about two inches smaller than that measurement
 and you sew it up in a circle and put it around your body at your upper bust and in a minute I'll
 cover how to determine that it is there at your upper bust. You will leave it there for the rest
 of the measuring because it's a key point a key level that you will need to take other measurements.
 You want to make sure that it stays in the same place for the rest of measuring so make sure it's
 firm but not too tight so that it's painful or uncomfortable. Now I'm telling you this for the
 upper bust but after you've taken your bust measurement I want you to do the same thing for the bust.
 In the case of the elastic for the bust you want to make sure that it is parallel to the floor
 from the front back and side. Now after you've put the elastic on in the first instance for the
 upper bust and then later for the bust retake the measurement. The reason for that is when the
 elastic is on you can actually check that you've got it at the right place for example for the bust
 that it's level to the floor parallel to the floor at the upper bust that it is at the right level.
 Once you've made sure that you have that right then you retake the measurement to make sure that
 you did take it correctly the first time or if you didn't that you have the correct measurement
 after you've put the elastic on as a guide but it's essential that you leave the elastic there
 because it is key to taking the other measurements correctly. Now I said to put the elastic at the
 upper bust at the underarm level when I say the underarm level I don't mean jammed right up
 against your underarm flesh so get a narrow ruler if you have one about one inch wide that's perfect
 and put the ruler right up against your flesh. The bottom of the ruler if it's one inch wide is
 where the elastic should go. So you use the bottom of the ruler as a guide to place the elastic around
 the upper bust so if you line it the elastic up with the bottom of the ruler at the side seams
 then it will be at the correct level at the front and the butt. Measurement number two.
 So now we know where the upper bust is and we put some elastic around at upper bust at the correct
 level we're going to take the upper bust front arc and the upper bust back arc measurements.
 Basically that's from side seam to side seam for the front and side seam to side seam
 for the back. So how do you tell where the side seam ends and begins? How do you tell where the front
 ends and the back begins or where the back ends and the front begins? On Dee Dee it's very easy to
 tell because she very hopefully has a seam right down the middle of her body to say that it's
 the side seam but for a person how can you tell? Okay so just to clarify we're doing measurement
 number two upper bust arc front which is the front block from side seam to side seam at the
 underarm level. Now if you have a well-fitting underwire bra that is one that fits correctly
 in the band and in the cup it's quite easy to tell where the side seam is. If you've watched
 my previous videos this should make sense because the whole point of using the front arc is to get
 the right angle for the side seam. Now the right angle is about bringing the fabric around the bust
 so it meets at the side seam. Now if you don't have a well-fitting bra and you do what I suggest
 to get the side seam chances are that you'll end up with a pattern making bra cut that's too small
 and I'll cover why that is. Now on the left is a bra that fits Dee Dee quite well in the band
 it's not too tight and the side seam of the bra actually matches up with her side seam.
 On the right is a bra that's too small in the band but because the back band is the bit that's
 stretchy rather than the front it is stretching to accommodate her width and it's ending up too far
 forward. I'm sure if she was a person though she would realize that this bra does not fit her.
 So here are three bras on my body form and the side seam of the bra ends up being on the side
 seam that I use for my block. The band is the right size and the cup encompasses all of my
 breast tissue correctly. In this slide all the bras are badly fitting because the bands are too small
 or too large. For Dee Dee the band is too small so the side seam of the bra is too far forward
 because the band is the stretchy bit and is doing the work. For me in the middle the band is actually
 too large yet again it's still doing the same thing as it is indeed his case the side seam is
 pulling forward because the band is too large. Now the bra on the right has a band that is too small
 and yet again the side seam is pulling forward. So if your bra band is too tight or too loose
 chances are your side seam will end up being too far forward and likewise if your bra cup is too small
 chances are that your band will be stretching forward and your bra side seam will be too far
 forward. So basically if you've got a well fitting bra with a side seam in the band
 then you have a perfect guide for the placement of the side seam for your block.
 So what if your bra doesn't have a side seam? A lot of bras don't have a side seam in the band
 at all nowadays they have the bra cup and then the band is one full piece well except for the
 back where you tie it up. Now all of these bras that fit well in this image do have side seams
 and the distance between the bra cup and that side seam for me is about one and a quarter or one and
 three eighths of an inch. Now I actually went today and had a look at a lot of bras and a variety
 of sizes here in Australia and in smaller to mid sizes that seems pretty consistent it's like
 between one inch and one and three eighths of an inch. Larger sizes are up to one and a half inches.
 So I suggest using either the side seam of a well fitting bra as to the guide where your side
 seam is or measure one and a quarter inches from where the cup ends and use that as your side seam.
 Now let me be clear we're talking about the upper bust here so we're talking about the
 top of the bra where the underwire ends under your armpit we're talking about using that as the guide
 measuring from there one inch out from there towards your back and using that as your side seam point.
 Now if you don't have a well fitting bra that's another issue you'll have to make a guess you'll
 have to determine where your breast tissue ends and then measure one and a quarter or one and a
 half inches from there towards your back and a guess at your side seam maybe it's best to go out
 and buy a well fitting bra and I suggest you use some painter's tape draw a line down the middle
 of the painter's tape place it at the point at the underarm so that when you measure the front arc
 and the back arc you are measuring from and to the exact same point and place that tape down
 the center of the body so that you have a straight line to the waist our painters tape because it
 won't damage clothing it pulls off really easy and it won't leave sticky residue so measurement
 number three is the upper bust arc back it is the upper bust back from side seam to side seam
 making sure that you're using the same point at the side seam that you used for the front arc
 and if you've marked the points as per the previous slide this should be straightforward
 measurement number four is the bust circumference around the fullest part of the bust
 don't forget to tie a piece of elastic around the bust and then afterwards take that measurement
 again and it should be around the bust parallel to the floor at the front the tape measure should
 cross the apex of both breasts measurement number five the bust arc front if you've marked the side
 seam with a painter's tape you've marked the upper bust side seam point then this should be fairly
 easy it's from the side seam around the front to the other side seam at the bust level here i'm
 showing you the front bust arc on the block the blue double-headed arrow notice that the bust line
 isn't straight across the block like the upper bust is just compare my bust line on the right
 what my bust arc looks like compared to dds the larger the bust the greater the distance between
 the upper bust and bust now that bust line is looking very angular in reality it would be a curve
 and here that's shown on the twirl measurement number six is the bust arc back again from side
 seam to side seam but around the back this time at the bust level parallel to the floor it should
 cross the fullest part of the bust at the front and this should be fairly simple if you've got that
 piece of elastic around there and you've checked it and it hasn't moved then it's just from side
 seam to side seam assuming you've marked those side seams correctly with the instructions i've
 given you before and here is the bust back arc shown on the block measurement number seven is the
 waist around the smallest part of the torso this is another place where you need to tie a piece
 of elastic around your waist or when i say tie it's better to sew it up and leave it on because
 it's a reference point you'll need it for the length measurements later measurement number eight
 is the shoulder length it's from the high neck point to the shoulder point and i'll give you some
 information about how to designate those points on your shoulder the high neck point can be found
 by putting a neck lace on where the chain touches the neck that's the high neck point to find your
 shoulder point lift your arm and where the joint is you should find a little indent there that you
 can put your finger in that's the shoulder point again i suggest you use some painter's tape that
 doesn't stick and won't damage clothing draw a line down the middle of the tape and use it for
 the shoulder and side seam lines you have reference points on it and so you are always going to measure
 from and to those same points so for example when we later measure the full length front and the
 full length back you need to make sure that you use the exact same point at the high neck for those
 two measurements and likewise when measuring the shoulder slope front and the shoulder slope back
 you use the exact same point at the shoulder measurement number nine side length from the
 armhole depth to the waist we have previously determined where the underarm point was when we
 place the elastic around the upper bust so from the upper bust elastic down to the waist at the
 side seam now if you put the painters tape there when marking the side seam for the upper bust arcs
 then you don't have much to do now if the person has to move their arm back a little bit so you
 can measure properly at the side seam make sure they don't lift their shoulder when they move their
 arm back measurement number ten full length front from the high neck point to the waist
 in a straight line down the front this is the same high neck point you use to measure the shoulder
 length and that point needs to remain consistent for all the measurements that use it measurement
 number 11 center front length from the hollow in the neck to the waist in a straight line
 you should have a piece of elastic around your waist it doesn't matter if you use the top of
 the elastic or the bottom of the elastic as the reference point as long as you're consistent so
 you always use either the top or you always use the bottom when you're measuring down to the waist
 now i have not actually drawn this line this measurement on the twile it's not one of those
 colored lines on the calico the measurement is taken for most people from the center front neck
 to the shoulder point the same one used previously for the shoulder length
 now for some people taking the measurement this way may be a little problematic and i'll show
 that in the next slide now on the silhouette on the left is how the measurement is taken and
 how it works with a standard figure because if you measure across from the center front neck
 to the shoulder you know you can do that in a straight line but if you have a rounded up
 a back and your neck jucks forward a lot your center front may be actually quite a bit lower
 than your shoulder so when you measure from the center front to the shoulder it isn't a straight
 line but rather on a downward angle and it could actually end up quite a bit longer than the width
 that you're trying to measure so you'll end up with a measurement that's too long so in that
 case you need to kind of measure down a little bit down a bit on the body down a bit on the chest
 but measure out further than the arm to where the shoulder point is so if you have a look at that
 image hopefully that some gives you an indication of how you could do it measurement number 13
 shoulder slope front from the shoulder point to the waist passing over the bust in this case
 for DD it crosses right over her bust point but that won't always be the case so here for example
 is that shoulder slope on my twirl and on my block it doesn't cross the bust point the bust point
 is to the left a couple of inches or so measurement number 14 the bust depth we will measure the
 bust depth three different ways just to be sure the first way is on the shoulder slope line so put
 the tape measure on the body as you would to measure the shoulder slope so one end at the shoulder tip
 and the other end at the waist and look at the measurement where it crosses the bust line so from
 the shoulder tip to the bust line elastic but making sure you're holding the other end of the measuring
 tape at the waist as if you were taking the shoulder slope measurement measurement number 15 is the
 bust depth again but measuring this time from the center front neck point to the bust line so
 where the bust elastic is making sure it's in a straight line so this is really part of the center
 front measurement so if you were splitting the center front measurement into two from the center
 front to the bust and then the bust to the waist measurement number 16 again the bust depth this
 time taking it on the full length front line so from the high neck point to the bust line elastic
 measurement number 17 is the bust depth at the side seam now if you have your painter's tape
 at your side seam and if you've got elastic at your upper bust and you've got elastic around
 your bust then it's very simple at the side seam measure from the upper bust elastic down to the
 bust elastic measurement number 18 the bust span from apex to apex basically for most people
 from nipple to nipple take the whole measurement on the measurement chart it shows that we will
 divide it by two to draft the half block measurement number 19 the front armhole depth from the high
 neck point to the upper bust line elastic measurement number 20 the front armhole depth again we're
 just checking it a second time from the center front neck to the upper bust line measurement number
 21 the front armhole depth again the third time from shoulder point to the upper bust line but
 making sure the tape measure is placed from the shoulder point to the waist as if you're taking
 the shoulder slope but measuring from the shoulder point to the upper bust elastic measurement number
 22 across chest from armhole to armhole this measurement helps to get the right armhole curve
 now at what depth do you take that measurement for DD here I measured down half the center front
 neck to upper bust so half of that measurement measured down and that's where I measured the
 across chest that's a good place to start either half or two thirds of the center front neck
 to the upper bust is what I suggest now why can't I give you a definite number
 it can be different from person to person and I'll give you an example
 a block making instruction that I used early on said to measure down from the neck point
 to the bust and then use half of that measurement if I use that I would end up where the red line is
 so my across chest would end up below my armhole my point being sometimes a hard and fast rule
 doesn't suit everybody but I would suggest that you measure your across chest approximately a half
 or two thirds of the distance between your center front neck and your upper bust
 measurement number 23 full length back from the high neck point to the back waist now with
 the full length front and full length back it's a good idea to double check them by taking the whole
 body measurement that is from the front waist up through the high neck point to the back waist
 and making sure that the front and back measurements add up to that full measurement just to double
 check those measurements measurement number 24 center back length from the back neck to the back
 waist again you can use a necklace to find that back neck point like you used it to find the um
 the side neck point the high neck point measurement number 25 across shoulder back
 measure from shoulder point to shoulder point across the back we will actually only use half
 of this measurement but there are a number of measurements where we take like the whole measurement
 and in my measurement chart I show that we will divide that by two to draft the half block
 measurement number 26 shoulder slope back from the shoulder point to the back waist and again
 like the full length front and full length back measurement I suggested that you could do the
 whole measurement to double check it the shoulder slopes are similar you can measure from front waist
 through the shoulder point to the back waist and make sure that the full measurement does equal
 the back and the front together measurement number 27 is the back armhole depth now the next three
 measurements are taking the back armhole depth three different ways like we did the front this
 measurement isn't actually used or needed in drafting the block because the armhole depth works
 out based on what we do with other measurements but it's useful to have this in case you end up
 with the result you're unsure of and you can use these to check measurement number 28 another
 back armhole depth from the center back neck point to the upper bust line measurement number 29
 the final back armhole depth from the high neck point to the upper bust line measurement number
 30 the back neck you actually measure from the center back neck to the high neck point or you
 could alternatively measure from the high neck point on one side of the body around the high neck
 point on the other side of the body and divide by two however when you're measuring make sure you
 don't hold the tape measure above the neck line make sure it is below the neck line so looking at
 the two images to the left up the top it's saying if you held the tape measure above that neck line
 you would get a different and a smaller result than if you held and measured the with the tape
 measure below the neck line measurement number 31 across back from armhole to armhole across the
 back the depth at which you measure that is about half the back neck to the upper bust distance
 measurement number 32 the final measurement is the back waist dart placement so measuring
 from the center back waist to the desired placement and the keyword is desired what works one person
 will be different for another if you know where you prefer your back dart to be then use that
 measurement if you don't then i'll give you a starting place however when you draft your
 trial you might find it doesn't suit you there for whatever reason and you could move it right
 or left as it suits your body in the next slide i'll show you with mine
 i prefer to place mine where it creates the easiest princess shoulder line so we've come to the end
 of our measurements and next time we can start drafting the bodice block so here's what i'm doing
 next and what i plan for the rest of the year first i'll be redoing the bodice block videos
 with the improvements to the system then an e-pub booklet on pants to accompany the pants videos
 here on youtube an e-pub booklet to accompany the bodice block video then i'll be moving on to
 some patterns so doing a video and having booklets so step by step various patterns jeans um dresses
 etc and interspersed with the patterns are some theory videos contouring manipulating darts
 stretch blocks etc and if you find my tutorials helpful consider supporting me by buying me a
 cup of coffee on Ko-fi click on the Ko-fi link in my channel header that money goes to that money
 goes towards my website expenses hosting plugins etc and also to the subscription i need to pay for
 the adobe creative suite which i use to create all the graphics and the videos okay this is Maria
 from dress pattern making job. [Music]
